Pascal famously argued that practical reasoning should lead people to try to
form within themselves a commitment to religious practice and obedience, based
upon a belief in God. I propose to take a less ambitious argument, which I
call the Sensible Argument, and use it to present The Puzzle. I argue that
there is a huge puzzle here, about the radical dissonance between the beliefs
and practices of many of the purportedly religious. There are, I will argue,
good reasons to doubt, concerning many (clearly not all or indeed most)
purported religious believers, whether they are indeed believers, or at least
whether their beliefs are strong; and religion seems to greatly increase the
risks of deception, duplicity, and hypocrisy, as well as self-deception and
inauthenticity. By turning towards a religious form of life, one will
therefore be adding great morality-related risks. Arguably, if there is a God
who deeply cares about individual moral behaviour, he would punish religious
moral transgressors more than the secular ones. One is unlikely to be saved
from hell (or other severe divine punishment) by becoming religious. If one is
going to wager, it seems much more sensible to wager on the secular side.

[ ![Is God the Best Explanation of Things? A Dialogue is Now
Out!](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-RUJygo9ZI5s/XZKz9ZN1-tI/AAAAAAAA3BY/WcfmwPogtPIR7fHT1fgwSJxfTIiHQ_72ACK4BGAYYCw/s1600/Book%2BCover%2BIGtBEoT.png)
](https://www.amazon.com/God-Best-Explanation-Things-
Dialogue/dp/3030237540/ref=tmm_pap_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=)  

Smilansky, Saul. " Reversing Pascal's Wager: Scepticism About Religious Belief
and Its Value ", Religious Studies (forthcomin...

Smilansky, Saul. "[Reversing Pascal's Wager: Scepticism About Religious Belief
and Its Value](https://philpapers.org/rec/SMIRPS-2)", _Religious Studies_
(forthcoming).

The fact that orthodox theists, from at least Augustine and all the way to the
present, have seen logic as the expression of single, rational, divine Mind is
at least some evidence that theism expects and predicts logical monism. But
[the case](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10992-008-9082-6)
[against logical monism](https://www.st-
andrews.ac.uk/~ac117/papers/LogicalNihilism.pdf) \-- and for the disjunction
of logical pluralism and logical nihilism -- is more plausible than the case
for logical monism. But the truth of the disjunction of logical pluralism and
logical nihilism is prima facie more surprising on theism than on naturalism.
Therefore, the case for the disjunction of logical pluralism and logical
nihilism provides at least some evidence against theism.

Recent empirical work on [motivated
reasoning](https://compass.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/phc3.12828)
indicates that it is strongly resistant to detection, even despite our best
efforts (Ballantyne 2015; Pronin et al. 2002). Perhaps worse, other work shows
that attempts to preempt motivated reasoning reinforce its impact (Ehrlinger
et al. 2005; Schwitzgebel & Ellis 2017). This is surprising on theism, given
that it's surprising that God would design our cognitive faculties in a way
that's highly disposed to unreliability -- and likely without remedy --
especially in ways that can be morally pernicious. By contrast, it's not
surprising on naturalism, since nature is "indifferent" to our welfare on that
hypothesis, and since motivated reasoning is conducive to survival and
reproduction (Mercier & Sperber 2011). Therefore, the existence of motivated
reasoning is at least some evidence for naturalism vis-a-vis theism.

