"One of the best contemporary writers on philosophy" _National Review_  
  
"A terrific writer" Damian Thompson, _Daily Telegraph_  
  
"Feser... has the rare and enviable gift of making philosophical argument
compulsively readable" Sir Anthony Kenny, _Times Literary Supplement_  
  
Selected for the _First Things_ list of the 50 Best Blogs of 2010 (November
19, 2010)  

###  Adventures in the Old Atheism, Part VII: The influence of Kant

Why do I propose that Kant’s influence did even more to bolster modern atheism
than Hume’s? Because Kant offered a _positive_ alternative to the traditional
metaphysics that upheld theism, whereas Hume’s critique is essentially
negative. To be sure, contemporary commentators are correct to hold that it is
too simple to read Hume as a mere skeptic, full stop. True, he does try to
undermine traditional metaphysical views about substance, causation, the self,
moral value, etc. But he also emphasizes that the hold such notions have over
common sense cannot be shaken by philosophical skepticism, since they are too
deeply rooted in human psychology. And for purposes of “common life,” they are
indispensable. Hume’s aim is merely to clip the wings of highfalutin
rationalist metaphysical speculation, not to undermine the convictions of the
ordinary person.

All the same, precisely for that reason, Hume’s account of _philosophy_ , if
not of common sense, is essentially destructive. Moreover, a consistent Humean
will have to take a much more modest view of natural science than contemporary
atheists are wont to do – in part because of Hume’s attack on attempts to
justify induction, and in part because the deliverances of modern physics are
hardly less abstruse and remote from common life than the rationalist
speculations he was so keen to shoot down. A Humean must also give up a
rationalistic ethics, given that, as he famously holds, there is nothing
contrary to _reason_ (but only to the sentiments of the average person) to
prefer that the entire world be destroyed than that one should suffer a
scratch to his finger. Humean arguments entail a pessimism about the powers of
human reason that doesn’t sit well with scientism or with dogmatic and
triumphalist versions of atheism (even if many atheists and adherents of
scientism naively suppose otherwise).

Kant, by contrast, tied his critique of traditional metaphysics to an
essentially positive and optimistic view of what reason could accomplish.
True, he did not think reason could penetrate into the natures of things as
they are in themselves. Since that’s what traditional metaphysics claimed to
do, and natural theology is grounded in such metaphysics, his position entails
a critique of traditional metaphysics and natural theology. However, in Kant’s
view this entailed no doubts about the rational foundations of morality or of
science (which concerns the world as it appears to us rather than as it is in
itself). A consistent Humean has to put natural theology, natural science, and
ethics in the same boat. A consistent Kantian can leave natural theology in
the boat by itself.

All the same, Kant’s critique of natural theology did not stem from the view
that it is an irrational enterprise.  Quite the contrary. The New Atheist
supposes that all theology reflects an insufficient respect for reason. Kant
argues, by contrast, that in fact natural theology reflects an _excessive
confidence_ in the power of reason. In particular, it reflects the conviction
that ultimate explanation is possible, that the world can be made intelligible
through and through. Nor did Kant suppose that natural theology looked for
such explanation in the crudely anthropomorphic “sky daddy” of New Atheist
caricature. Here is how he describes the basic impulse behind philosophical
theism in the _Critique of Pure Reason_ :

_Reason… is impelled… to seek a resting-place in the regress from the
conditioned, which is given, to the unconditioned… This is the course which
our human reason, by its very nature, leads all of us, even the least
reflective, to adopt_ …

_If we admit something as existing, no matter what this something may be, we
must also admit that there exists something which exists_ necessarily _. For
the contingent exists only under the condition of some other contingent
existence as its cause, and from this again we must infer yet another cause,
until we are brought to a cause which is not contingent, and which is
therefore unconditionally necessary_…

_Now… that which is in no respect defective, that which is in every way
sufficient as a condition, seems to be precisely the being to which absolute
necessity can fittingly be described. For while it contains the conditions of
all that is possible, it itself does not require and indeed does not allow of
any condition, and therefore satisfies… the concept of unconditioned
necessity_…

_The concept of an_ ens realissimum _is therefore, of all concepts of possible
things, that which best squares with the concept of an unconditionally
necessary being; and… we have no choice in the matter, but find ourselves
constrained to hold to it…_

_Such, then, is the natural procedure of human reason_.  _It… looks around for
the concept of that which is independent of any condition, and finds it in
that which is itself the sufficient condition of all else, that is, in that
which contains all reality. But that which is all-containing and without
limits is absolute unity, and involves the concept of a single being that is
likewise the supreme being_. (pp. 495-97, Norman Kemp Smith translation)

Reason, Kant says, cannot be satisfied as long as the explanations it posits
make reference only to what is conditioned, to contingent things. _Ultimate_
explanation must posit the existence of something which is absolutely _un_
conditioned or _necessary_. This something would be a single, unified “ _ens
realissimum_ ” or most real being, would be devoid of any defect, and would be
the source of all other reality – it would possess “the _highest_ causality…
which contains primordially in itself the sufficient ground of every possible
effect” (p. 499). Naturally, it is not the likes of Zeus or Odin that Kant has
in mind, but rather the Unmoved Mover of Aristotle and Aquinas, the One of
Plotinus, the Necessary Being of Leibniz, and so on.

The trouble with this sort of reasoning, Kant thinks, is not that its
conclusion is false – again, he was no atheist – but rather that, given his
epistemology, reason lacks the resources to transcend the empirical world and
prove the existence of a necessary or unconditioned being outside it. The
notion of causality, he argues, applies only _within_ the phenomenal world,
the world of things as they appear to us, whereas reasoning to a necessary
being would require applying it beyond that world, to the noumenal world or
things as they are in themselves. And we cannot, in his view, know the latter.

By no means does this make reasoning to such a divine first cause
superstitious or otherwise foolish. After all, Kant also thinks that the
notions of space and time apply only within the phenomenal world and not to
things as they are in themselves. You might think it _mistaken_ to suppose
that the notions of space and time apply to things as they are in themselves,
but few would regard it as superstitious, or irrational, or otherwise
contemptible to do so. By the same token, there is nothing superstitious,
irrational, or otherwise contemptible in the idea of a first uncaused cause,
even if one supposes, with Kant, that reason is incapable of validly drawing
the inference to it.

Again, in Kant’s view, it is not the abandonment of reason, but rather the
attempt to fulfill reason’s ultimate ambitions, that yields natural theology.
And reason will remain frustrated even in the face of Kantian attempts to show
that this ambition cannot be fulfilled. It is “quite beyond our utmost efforts
to _satisfy_ our understanding in this matter” but “equally unavailing are all
attempts to induce it to acquiesce in its incapacity” (p. 513).

“As follows from these considerations,” Kant says, “the ideal of the supreme
being is nothing but a _regulative principle_ of reason, which directs us to
look upon all connection in the world _as if_ it originated from an all-
sufficient necessary cause” (p. 517). Note that Kant is not saying that this
ideal is an unavoidable useful _fiction_ , but rather that it is unavoidable
and useful even if (in his view) _unprovable_.

Even so, he does not regard the affirmation of God’s existence as groundless.
On the contrary, he famously argues that a rationale for affirming it is to be
found in practical rather than pure reason, in ethics rather than in
metaphysics. Just as reason seeks an ultimate explanation, so too, Kant argues
in the _Critique of Practical Reason_ , it seeks the highest good. And the
highest good, he argues, would be the conjunction of moral virtue, which makes
us worthy of happiness, with happiness itself.

Now, we are obligated by the moral law to try to realize this highest good.
And since _ought_ implies _can_ , it must be possible to realize it. Yet it is
obviously not realized in this life, since virtuous people often suffer and
evil people often live lives of comfort and pleasure. Moreover, Kant thinks,
its realization _cannot_ be guaranteed in this life, since there is, he
thinks, no inherent necessary correlation between the demands of the moral law
and the causal order that governs the natural world. We can make sense of such
a correlation only if we postulate a supreme being who brings the two orders
into correlation (in the afterlife).

Kant does not take this to be a strict proof of God’s existence, but rather an
argument to the effect that it is reasonable to affirm God’s existence. And
once again, the idea is not that theism involves believing something contrary
to reason, but quite the opposite. Affirming God’s existence is, in Kant’s
view, precisely what is called for in order to make sense of what reason
dictates in the realm of action.

It is widely supposed that Hume and Kant put paid to the arguments of natural
theology. But their critiques largely presuppose their background views in
epistemology and metaphysics. If you don’t buy those views (and I don’t) you
needn’t accept their critiques. Yet Hume’s and Kant’s general epistemological
and metaphysical views are hardly uncontroversial, and many who suppose their
critiques of natural theology to be compelling would not accept them (if,
indeed, they even know much about them).

Moreover, as I have argued, if you do accept these background views, then to
be consistent you’d have to draw other conclusions that most New Atheist types
would not want to draw. Again, if you accept a Humean critique of natural
theology, then to be consistent you should also be skeptical about the claims
of natural science and ethics to tell us anything about objective reality. And
if you accept a Kantian critique of natural theology, then while you can
consistently take natural science and ethics to have a rational basis, you
cannot consistently treat theology with the contempt that Dawkins and Co.
typically do. Hence the lessons so many have drawn from Hume’s and Kant’s
critiques is not the one either of those critiques actually supports.

Contemporary atheism is founded on Hume's empirical atheism and Kant's
conceptual agnosticism. That's why so many of them on YouTube and Facebook
call themselves agnostic atheists: because atheism as it is recognized today
is a marriage of the two.

Are there any book-length analyses of Kant's philosophy that you could
recommend from a Thomist?  
  
The only philosophy book I've read (so far) that gives an analysis of Kant is
Peter Kreeft's book "Socrates Meets Kant" (which is written as a fictional
dialog between those 2).  
  
I know that you (Feser) have addressed some of Kant's criticisms of Natural
Theology in your books, but I was wondering if you could recommend any
Thomists that have done more in-depth work on this.

Try Etienne Gilson's The Unity of Philosophical Experience, which includes a
penetrating analysis of modern philosophy, including Kant, from a Thomist
perspective

Also Gilson's Thomist Realism and The Critique of Knowledge and also
Methodical Realism. The second one is good for beginners.

Also the header of your last section fooled me. "The afterlife of Hume and
Kant". Your previous section talked about how Kant believed moral values
needed the next life, so I was expecting a discussion of how Kant's view of
the afterlife was different from Hume's annihilationism.

That Hume could be so confident that he would cease to be is quite funny with
his view on casuality XD

If Hume lived a little longer, he would have started to believe in some kind
of rebirth. Bundle theories of self naturally lead to belief in rebirth.

I heard once that there were some translations of some buddhist texts in
Europe at his time. Funny to think how Hume reaction to they would be.

@Talmid What do you think about this argument in favor of the bundle theory of
self?  
  
1\. If there is more to an object than its properties, then it is possible to
conceive of said object with all its properties stripped away.  
  
2\. That is inconceivable.  
  
3\. Therefore an object and its properties are one and the same.  
  
Christians aren't allowed to believe in bundle theories of self, because we
believe that G-d made us as perfect substances. That's why the church so
strongly opposes this transgender madness.

@Infinite Growth  
  
What do "stripped of all its properties" means? Even if you take away all of a
being visible characteristics there would still be the potentials, the thing
being a composite of essence and existence, the thing having started to be
etc, so perhaps 2 is false.  
  
Besides, I'am against conceivability arguments in general. Aunt May sure can
conceive of a Spiderman that is not Peter Parker, this is what she does, but
he is still the Spider. But this is the less important point, for the argument
is not the normal conceivability argument.  
  
On top of that, our cognition starts by a thing characteristics, we only know
the substance latter, and we classify things according to the characteristics
it has, so it is should not suprise us that we cant conceive of it with no
characteristics.  
  
I mean, a human is a rational animal, the essence is separated by its
characteristics. The diference between one essence and another is the
essencial characteristics any has, so it is no wonder that we cant
diferentiate one from another once we take the essencial characteristics away.  
  
So perhaps 1 is false, for it is probably the case that even on a substance
view of the self we should expect 2 to be true. Maybe only on Scotus-like view
were every thing has a natural "haecceitas"(had to google) 2 would be false.  
  
Sorry for not giving a straight answer, it is that my thinking got a to were
it wanted to go, it happens with me :)

I'm no trained philosopher, but Kant's phenomenal/noumenal distinction seems
really suspicious to me. It's hard for me to even understand why you would
want to make such a distinction except unless you were motivated by the desire
to deny the force of arguments for the existence of God.  
  
I don't get how the nouminal world can really be "things as they are" if they
are entirely causally inert with respect to how we perceive things. This seems
like a very "russel's teapot" kind of situation where if we can't draw any
conclusions about things as they are, why are we even bothering to try to talk
about "things as they are"?

 _if we can't draw any conclusions about things as they are, why are we even
bothering to try to talk about "things as they are"?_  
  
I concur: the distinction is extremely suspect. For one thing, is there any
"things as they ARE" **about** things "as they appear to us" (i.e. the
phenomena)? Or really, how could there NOT be any aspect to "things as they
appear to us" that "really are"? For instance, do they REALLY seem that way,
or is it "just an appearance?" How, indeed, could we speak **meaningfully**
about "things as they seem to us" without those things _having_
characteristics (even if only seeming so - they SEEM to have certain
characteristics, and that FACT is something _that is so_ even apart from
seeming). It is, further, utterly silly to simply posit the world of phenomena
being utterly divorced from "things as they really are", and then talk about
it with everyone else as if _your_ experience had ANY relationality with them
(or even their sheer existence). Your words would be (always) sheer gibberish
to everyone else, and (at best) only _seeming_ to you to have any sense at
all.  
  
It seems to have all the worst drawbacks of the "mind is merely electron
actions in neurons" approach, and then some.

 _It's hard for me to even understand why you would want to make such a
distinction except unless you were motivated by the desire to deny the force
of arguments for the existence of God._  
  
The motivation stems from Kant's attempt to respond to Humean skepticism. Kant
thinks metaphysical principles (e.g. every event must have a cause) can only
be justified in virtue of their expressing conditions of the possibility of
experience, viz. the conditions objects must satisfy in order to be objects of
experience _for us_. But this suggests the need to distinguish between two
says of considering objects, namely in relation to subjects with our forms of
cognition (things as they appear to us) and independently of such relations
(things as they are in themselves).  
  
Now, I'm not a Kantian, and I don't think his views are ultimately
satisfactory, but I hope this brief summary shows it isn't some misguided
attempt to undermine natural theology.

@Anon  
  
"It's hard for me to even understand why you would want to make such a
distinction except unless you were motivated by the desire to deny the force
of arguments for the existence of God."  
  
Well, Kant starts with the humean thesis that sense data can only generate
contigent knowledge. He quickly realized that empiricism is dumb, for we do
have necessary knowledge, so he was a sort of rationalist early. Necessary
knowledge comes from reason.  
  
But them Kant understood that sense data is pretty much how we have
information about reality, so if our necessary knowledge does not come from
the senses them it either:  
  
1\. Has no basis on reality and is mere play with definitions(which smart
empiricists do defend).  
  
2\. Come from something else.  
  
The prussian argued that at least mathematics is a sort of necessary knowledge
that is not created by language, so 2 won. His answer was that we can know
some truths about how we happen to organize sense data by analysing the
necessary conditions to our experience to it to be how it is. For instance,
every experience we have is in time, it has a sucession and all that, so we
can derive several truths about that(inded, mathematics would have his origin
on the forms of time and space).  
  
And so, by knowing this structure we could show that every possible experience
we could have need to obey a certain structure and so gather several truths
about how things appear to us. This method is worthless to know things we cant
empirically know, though.

Of course, this does not means that we do not know ANYTHING about how things
really are, for Kant argued against things really having the characteristics
our innate structure puts on they, like the forms of space and time or the
categories like casuality. Read someday Sebastian Gardner book on Kant to get
the details, it is a very good account of Kant views and arguments.  
  
Academics do dispute the view that the thing-itself is a separate thing from
phenomena, the two-worlds interpretation, but i do feel like it gets close to
Kant intend. Specially if one see things like his defense of free will.  
  
About a way of making this view sound coherent, Schopenhauer did a good job of
deriving some conclusions about the thing-itself. Of all the germans, i still
do not know which took Kant view to the more coherent direction, but he got to
a interesting point.

I would agree with John above that Kant wasn't motivated by a desire to
undermine (Christian) theology, though he didn't help either.  
  
Hume has launched an attack on metaphysics, in particular, moral philosophy
and theology. I suspect Kant’s response to Hume was an act of self-defence, or
to borrow his own word in the _Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics_ , a
“rescue” mission. In a rescue mission, one is forced to rescue what he cares
about the most, and forgo the rest. Kant made a vigorous attempt to defend
moral philosophy, but left theology to fend for itself, if not threw it under
the bus.

Garrigou_LaGrange, "God: His Nature and Existence" 2Vols. is still a classic.

Also Brian Davies, OP "Thinking About God."  
and Dr Feser's "Aguinas."

Would you say Kant was a univocist? It seems that by saying reason cannot get
to the ultimate foundation of reality because it cannot access things as they
are in themselves, he is suggesting that there is no appropriate analogical
predication of being.

Kant seems to consider that phenomena has a lower degree of existence than the
thing-itself while considering phenomena real, so it will depend on the view
that one takes on the relation between the two.  
  
If we take a two-worlds interpretation them i suppose that both phenomena and
noumena "are" but on diferent ways, so we need something like analogy. If we
take a two-aspects interpretation them it seems like they are just one thing,
so there is only a mode of existence. If we take something like S. Gardner
view, that we dont know the relation at all, them who knows.

Oh boy, the prussian would not exactly be a fan of being here XD  
  
"Yet Hume’s and Kant’s general epistemological and metaphysical views are
hardly uncontroversial, and many who suppose their critiques of natural
theology to be compelling would not accept them (if, indeed, they even know
much about them)."  
  
Perfect. If one uses their criticism while not really accepting their views
them you know that there is no serious thinker in front of you.  
  
And i do find Kant system very good to a atheist, probably the best dificult
to natural theology, but i admit that reading your post make me reconsider the
possibility of a kantian atheist, Dr. Feser.  
  
The kantian "moral argument" seemed kinda weak to me, for pratical and
theoretical reason could just be contradictory and that is all. But this would
seriously wreak the power of reason and the confidence on science and
morality, so yea, kantism loses its appeal(one might as well go to something
even more modest, like Hayek).

There are Kantian atheists. A Kantian atheist could accept his general
metaphysical system while discarding his views on natural theology just like
he could accept Kant's position on mathematics while judging him to have erred
with regards to holding Euclidean geometry as logically necessary.

You know, i got a idea:  
  
"Moreover, Kant thinks, its realization cannot be guaranteed in this life,
since there is, he thinks, no inherent necessary correlation between the
demands of the moral law and the causal order that governs the natural world.
We can make sense of such a correlation only if we postulate a supreme being
who brings the two orders into correlation (in the afterlife)".  
  
Can't not one, in a wink to Schopenhauer, use this reasoning to get as well to
something more eastern like a sort of moksha? It would require a
pantheist/panentheist deity being the thing-itself and a completely detached
moral life(Kantian ethics meet the Gita!) would help one become one with God
and all that.  
  
Besides not being atheistic, a weakness of it when compared with theist
kantism is that it would not be capable of having objective morality, for
there is no real "I" that is the author of my acts, but it could make Kant
argument less probable.

Hun. It seems that this alternative view would not be capable of getting us to
objective morality, there is no self, so it would not serve as a alternative
to Kant theistic account.  
  
No wonder that Schopenhauer ethics seems more focused on describing that
prescribing.

WCB  
  
@Talmid  
"We can make sense of such a correlation only if we postulate a supreme being
who brings the two orders into correlation (in the afterlife)".  
  
See Plato, "The Laws - Book X". Here Plato tries to find arguments to convince
atheists to believe in God. Plato's Good Workman argument. God is a good
workman and so if good people suffer unfairly in this life, God will fix that
in the afterlife. Plato pretty much invented natural theology aimed squarely
at atheists. The trouble with his good workman hypothesis is it proves
nothing. It is based solely on hope. Maybe there is no God, no afterlife. And
a truly good workman does not allow errors now, that have to be rectified
later. So the Problem Of Evil rears its ugly head.  
  
WCB

"His argument doesn't work because he might have been wrong."  
  
Wow. Yet another devastating critique of the theistic tradition. Guess we
ought to just shot down the blog. WCB really has our number.

WCN and Papalinton are the voices of reason and sanity here. I hsve learned so
much from them. Thank you guys.

@WCB  
  
Its been a while since i read The Laws, but in there Plato argues for:  
  
\- the existence of gods, with his cosmological argument that leads to the
existence of souls  
\- self movers - that started all other movement.  
  
\- That the gods care about us, by pointing out that a better caretaker cares
about the details of his works, so the gods do care about everything.  
  
If these arguments come before Book X, i dont remember, them the Good Workman
Argument does sound reasonable to one who accept these premises. Like Kant
moral argument, hard to dismiss if you agree with the initial premises, it is
just that atheists do not.  
  
About the problem of evil, i dont remember Plato adressing it at all*, but he
believed that:  
  
\- the soul is living in a innatural condition when stuck in the body  
  
\- that the soul is only happy when it goes to the intellectual goods, which
every soul has the potential to do.  
  
\- that after death the soul just goes eventually to another body  
  
It seems that these premises do help developing a response to the problem of
evil. Proclus,probably the best neoplatonist, did make a interesting little
book on it, worth a reading.  
  
*makes sense that the hebrews would know it(see the Torah and Job) before him, the gods that the atheists/agnostics of his time were discussing were the greek ones, so it would not come from they, and Plato was not only a elitist but also probably a ascetic, hardly the guy to care about lower people not having material goods

WCB  
  
What evidence is there, hard evidence, we have a soul that survives evidence
and that there is a heaven. Other than ancient opinions? Why is life after
death and heaven and hell not mentioned at all in the Pentateuch?  
  
And yes, a truly good workman ala Plato would not make mistakes that need
rectifying.  
  
Why not start with creating all sentient beings good and in eternal bliss in
heaven to begin with? And then back to theological fatalism which i laid out
in an earlier thread? I never got a decent answer there.  
  
WCB  
  
WCB

LAA  
  
Well, fellow Anon, you know what WCB means, right?  
"Winners Can't Believe". And since he's not a believer, he's a winner.  
  
I mean, such a strong act of destruction from his part, I now have to stop
believing in God, and turn Aquinas to ashes. Such a powerful act!  
  
LAA  
  
(LAA : Losers Are Atheist)

WCB, this is a philosophy blog. We do philosophy here. If logical
demonstrations don’t qualify as “hard evidence” for you, you can go back to
Matt Dillihunty et al.  
  
The problem of evil (or at least the logical version of the problem of evil
that you keep harping on about), is a philosophical demonstration that the
existence of evil is inconsistent with God’s attributes of goodness,
omnipotence, etc. If Plato’s good work an argument provides a potential “out”
then the argument in the problem of evil fails because the conclusion does not
follow from the premises.  
  
Notice how in the thousands of words that Dr. Feser has devoted to the topic
of existential inertia, he has never once asked “where is the hard evidence
for existential inertia?” Because it doesn’t matter if you have independent
reasons to think such a thing exists. If the mere possibility of it’s
existence is consistent with the metaphysical premises of the classical
theists, then (most) cosmological arguments fail.  
  
You’re allowed to think that such theodicies are super unsatisfying
explanations, but stop pretending that “theists btfo with FACTS and LOGIC!!”
Nobody is going to take you seriously when you overstate your case like that.

@WCB  
  
Googled it and it seems that Proclus book is called "On the Existence of
Evils". It is quite a good "theodicy" on a neoplatonical theism. Read it
eventually, it is small but quite cool.  
  
Neoplatonism is very diferent than christian theism, but both do overlap a bit
on some aspect of theodicy. And the neoplatonics do escape of some problems
than the christians have on this theme. If you are interested on theism but
the problem of evil is a great preocupation them give Proclus a chance.  
  

Book IV of Divine Names is even better because Dionysius modifies Proclus's
privation view of evil to be compatible with a Christian perspective. Proclus
doesn't think spiritual creatures can be evil, but Dionysius does.

WCB  
  
The moral nature of man argument. If God decides to create man. Including
mankind's moral nature.  
  
God has three choices  
1\. Create mankind with a bad moral nature.  
2\. Create mankind with an indifferent moral nature.  
3\. Create mankind with a good moral nature.  
  
Our God given moral nature constrains our free will the free will argument for
existence of moral evil fails. Creating mankind with an indifferent moral
nature does not confer free will on mankind, just gurantees moral evil will be
committed in this world.  
  
If God is good, just, merciful, compassionate, and wise and cares about us,
God must choose to create all mankind with the best moral nature possible.  
  
The Problem Of Evil is not really A Problem, but is many such little problems
that have no answers. Theology should be about logic if Theologians give us
claims without hard evidence. The hard evidence in this world is moral evil
exists. Logic such as above demonstrates theological opinions seem to be very
wrong. How many logical dead ends like this does an Atheist need to
acknowledge the God hypothesis of a wise, perfectly good God fails?  
  
WCB

Agreed! Hope we still have a lot of atheists* on the line. Very good
reflections.  
  
  
*and Kant

Dr. Feser,  
  
How do you think Kant's nominalism played into his abandonment of metaphysical
proofs for God's existence? Michael Oberst recently wrote an article in
History of Phil Quarterly (2015) where he notes that while Kant says little
explicitly about universals, his recent interpreters agree that he "rejected
universals." Oberst agrees with some nuance (trying to situate Kant in some
middle ground between nominalism and realism).  
  
Without getting into exegesis of Kant on this point, do you think nominalism
might account for his denial of metaphysical proofs? It seems to me that his
nominalism would account for this and for his epistemology as well (with
nominalism understood as the denial of universal, extra mental form). Any
thoughts?  
  

Kant was one of the world's greatest thinkers. He phillosophy foresaw quantum
mechanics.  
  
Kant did not view things-in-themselves as containing the sum of all
possibilities, and phenomena all actualities; but this duality is conformable
to Kant's metaphysics as to none other. As a contribution to the metaphysics
of possibility, the quantum mechanical wave function can easily be seen as
complementary to Kant's idea of things-in-themselves, where various kinds of
things can happen (like free will) that are not comprehensible in terms of
phenomenal reality. Kant would just have to allow that characteristics of
physical reality can intrude some depth into things-in-themselves, which he
would not have considered -- though we can also handle this by positing an
intermediate level of reality, between true unconditioned things-in-themselves
and true discrete phenomenal objects -- as Kant otherwise actually does
himself for space and time as "pure intuitions." The wave function straddles
the classic Kantian boundary, sharing some properties with phenomena, others,
as underlying phenomena, with things-in-themselves.  
  
Thus, where Kant would have considered all of phenomena governed by
determinism, we now see the wave function as deterministic, while the collapse
of waves into particles is random. Although chance in quantum mechanics has
often been argued as allowing for free will, a free cause is still a very
different thing from a random cause, which doesn't need mind or self or
intention. Moral freedom is thus still left among things-in-themselves. Kant
himself would have had difficulty placing randomness in his ontology, if he,
like Hume, believed that chance violates determinism. Since chance is now part
of the physics, it cannot be denied; but it also still remains a different
matter from purposive freedom.  
  
Kant's idea that space and time do not exist among things-in-themselves has
been curiously affirmed by Relativity and quantum mechanics. In Relativity,
time simply ceases to pass at the velocity of light: for photons that have
travelled to us as part of the Cosmic Background Radiation, time has stood
still for most of the history of the universe. On the other hand, quantum
mechanics now posits "non-locality," i.e. physical distances, and so the
limitation of the velocity of light in Relativity, don't seem to exist. This
means that although time may apply to the wave function, space may not. The
full empirical reality of space is only found among discrete particles and
objects.  
  
This curious result is the consequence of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR)
Paradox, which was intended by Einstein as a reductio ad absurdum of quantum
mechanics. If, for instance, a positron and an election are both created from
an energetic photon, the conservation of angular momentum requires that one be
spinning one way, and the other the other. But the complementary spins are
equally probable for each particle. Thus, in quantum mechanical terms, the
wave functions of each particle divide without a discrete state being
determined. The particles might then separate to even cosmological distances,
but as soon as the spin of one particle is observed, the other particle must
have the opposite spin, which means that the wave function has collapsed
across those cosmological distances and caused the other particle to assume a
predictable spin. If this occurs instantaneously, it would violate the
limitation of the velocity of light in Special Relativity.  
  
This has now been shown to actually occur on the basis of Bell's Theorem (from
John Bell, 1928-1990), meaning that Quantum Mechanics does violate Special
Relativity by allowing instantaneous interactions across even cosmological
distances. However, once observed, processes must still obey Special
Relativity and the limitations of spatial distance, creating the kind of
duality described by Kant.  
  
  
  
  
  
  

"The trouble with this sort of reasoning, Kant thinks, is not that its
conclusion is false – again, he was no atheist – but rather that, given his
epistemology, reason lacks the resources to transcend the empirical world and
prove the existence of a necessary or unconditioned being outside it. The
notion of causality, he argues, applies only within the phenomenal world, the
world of things as they appear to us, whereas reasoning to a necessary being
would require applying it beyond that world, to the noumenal world or things
as they are in themselves. And we cannot, in his view, know the latter."
Trouble is, if Kant is right, nobody can know he's right, including Kant.
Right?

"One of the best contemporary writers on philosophy" _National Review_  
  
"A terrific writer" Damian Thompson, _Daily Telegraph_  
  
"Feser... has the rare and enviable gift of making philosophical argument
compulsively readable" Sir Anthony Kenny, _Times Literary Supplement_  
  
Selected for the _First Things_ list of the 50 Best Blogs of 2010 (November
19, 2010)  

I've grown weary of abstract discussion of racial issues from both the left
and right. It seems to me that if we were serious about healing the racial
divide we'd be focused on specific, bold, plans of action directed towards
that end. So for example...  
  
In the American context, how about totally free education (books, tuition,
room and board, everything) at every level for historically oppressed
minorities, paid for by the super-rich, and continued until such time as the
wealth gap between whites and minorities was erased. Specific, bold,
measurable plan of action with a defined vision of success.  
  
Whatever the merits of this particular idea may be, it serves as an example of
the kind of things we ought to talking about.  
  
In the Catholic context, the leader to follow would be Catholic Charities, and
not ideologists of any flavor.  

That could only serve to increase the wage gap as it will encourage a lot of
people who would otherwise go into lucrative trades to get useless degrees
(because hey it’s free) and just delay working by four years. So there is no
guarantee it would have the intended effect.  
  
But more importantly, that would be pure consequentialism. It would be the sin
of racism to favor particular groups of people on the basis of race alone. It
would also drive up the cost of tuition because now a significant portion of
the population would be guaranteed to pay for tuition by the power of the US
Government.  
  
Maybe something like a state-funded scholarship for Sons and Daughters of
slaves could be legitimate. But even that would probably need to be somewhat
selective.

What makes you think this plan would eliminate the wealth gap between white
and minorities? And why is eliminating that wealth gap inherently a good
thing?  
  
Groups achieve different outcomes. That’s not necessarily a sign of
discrimination. Often, it’s a sign of cultural differences between the two.
Should we also aim to eliminate the wealth gap between whites and Asians?
(Asians are usually on top).

Isn't that what affirmative action effectively already does to some extent,
which, incidentally, is on the chopping block? Except here, no rich people
need to shave any money off their bank accounts. And hasn't it failed? And
wasn't it just a lazy way of pretending to solve what is essentially a
cultural problem? (Recent African immigrants, by contrast, do very well,
academically and professionally, even after our previous American schools
teach them that, despite what their lying eyes tell them, they are, in fact,
oppressed, that there's no sense in denying it, and the only way out of the
invisible cage is through rage and self-pity.)  
  
But more to the point... By making things concrete, you make them tractable,
and when you make them tractable, you make it possible to arrive at a
goalpost. But who wants that? Once a problem is resolved, careers and
institutions built around the problem are threatened because you've taken away
their very raison d'etre. They no longer have the cudgel or leverage they once
had.  
  
The same is true of feminism. Many feminist demands have been met. But has
feminism gone away? If anything, it's become even more radicalized. People
often project their personal dissatisfactions and discomforts onto some
external, broad "common cause". Doing so allows them to feel in control, like
they've named the beast. Living a boring life? Must be because of racism. Not
getting what you want? Must be because of sexism or misogyny. And once the
demands of such people are met, they discover they're still where they were
and this is infuriating. A rational person would take this as an opportunity
for reflection, but a prideful person will simply double down. If things are
still shabby, it's necessarily because we haven't gone far enough! Thus begins
a race to the bottom...

"until such time as the wealth gap between whites and minorities was erased"  
  
That's the 'equity' in 'antiracism'. It's a non-starter.

 _I've grown weary of abstract discussion of racial_  
  
What defines "race". It has had different meanings at different times, and in
different contexts.  
  
_of racial issues_  
  
Which issues? No, **specifically** which issues? Those of injustice? What
about injustices commited by blacks at blacks? Oh, do you mean injusticed
committed by blacks on whites? Shoot, reverse that, I mean by whites on
blacks? What about all the other kinds of racial injustices?  
  
_if we were serious about healing the racial divide_  
  
What if only SOME of us are serious about it? Can we who are serious overcome
the intent of those who don't want it changed? What about democracy?  
  
_we'd be focused on specific, bold, plans_  
  
I have a specific, bold plan: every white man marries a black woman, and every
black man marries a white woman. In 2 generations, there will be no racial
divide at all.  
  
_how about totally free education_  
  
Mere "education" doesn't do it, if (a) the recipient isn't willing or able to
**receive** it. (Free) public high schools have enormous drop-out rates in
some areas, (mostly by minorities but not solely) - they theoretically have a
free education in front of them, but they decline it. If you re-make _college_
education to meet the standards of public schools, you'll get the same result.  
  
_Specific, bold, measurable plan of action with a defined vision of success._  
  
If you want to define success in such a narrow way, you guarantee failure in
respect of _other kinds_ of success. But aside from that: if your attempt were
to meet with ANTI-success (say, increased income gap), would you then **re-
pay** the people you took the money from to pay for that effort? (Because,
after all, it would have been demonstrated to be unjust.) And...whose money
would you use to do that?  
  
If you want to state a measurable outcome as "success", then you have to
equally identify what constitutes a "failure" of the attempt. And you have to
account for the _implications_ of failure, social and otherwise. Which means:
"free" might not, actually, be free.

Lets ignore the broad discussion for a bit.  
  
@First Anon  
  
"But more importantly, that would be pure consequentialism. It would be the
sin of racism to favor particular groups of people on the basis of race
alone."  
  
Okay, this does not work. Phil is not proposing this idea because he happens
to like minorities. He is proposing it because these folks are on a quite
crappy situation when compared to white folks. I understand that a group
facing inferior living conditions, oportunities etc by injust factors that we
can solve is a injustice that should be tackled in order to the common good of
the place to be better realized.  
  
Notice that i'am not discussing if the plan would work or what causes the
inequalities, not my turf, only the claim that helping out a particular race
as a matter of public police is necessarily racist.  

 _In the American context, how about totally free education (books, tuition,
room and board, everything) at every level for historically oppressed
minorities, paid for by the super-rich, and continued until such time as the
wealth gap between whites and minorities was erased._  
  
Amazing how so many plans to erase a racial divide (which must always be
illicit and evil, not at all natural) inevitably turns into a not-so-subtle
payday for people. There's a reason why "free" room and board, tuition, and
education is paired with the requirement that it be "paid for" by someone
else: because it's not free. And it's not going to be the super-rich paying
either.  
  
If the concern is to provide education as cheaply and freely as possible,
maybe we should consider price caps on tuition. The fact is, with the modern
internet, we are capable of providing a massive amount of education for dirt
cheap compared to what traditional, outdated institutions currently offer. In
fact, we already do so: see Coursera, or all kinds of other online options.  
  
But this solution, while clearly viable and even superior to the traditional
alternative, would not enrich the bloated, inefficient education system. And,
for all the cries of racism and inequality, circumventing that kind of payout
is not a price the loudest antiracists are willing to pay.  
  
That's one of the real problems: at some point we have to be willing to ask
whether the person crying "racism!" actually has a point, or if they're full
of it. They often are. There's a real conversation that needs to be had.

W.r.t. tuition and all this promising of free stuff, it's all a grift. At
Yale, for example, the number of employees working in administration is equal
to the number of students, all handsomely payed, I imagine. I recall hearing
recently that at some school (possibly Yale again), there are 76 "diversity
officers". Today's universities are money-making scams that offer a mediocre
education at an exorbitant price on top of the "ideological homogenization"
that is blatantly apparent when you talk to a recent college graduate.  
  
The only way to fix all these shenanigans is to cut universities off from the
government cheese. This will toss the bloated administration out onto the
street and cause a drop in tuition. Further market pressure will force
universities to cut tuition further because now you can't go to Uncle Sam for
financial aid.

It's a grift, absolutely. And I think it's an even deeper grift than that, and
not exclusive to the left.  
  
But what bothers me about this particular subject is that there has been an
absolutely, positively *insane* advancement in the ease of education in the
past couple of decades. In less than a single lifetime we went from books
almost exclusively being available on dead trees to having copies of massive
libraries able to fit in our pockets. And not just books, but videos,
interactive instructions, and more. We are swimming in a disgusting abundance
of free and accessible education which can be accessed for next to nothing, at
will, 24/7, anywhere on the planet. Education has never been easier and more
attainable than ever before for everyone in the world. Especially for English
speakers.  
  
Somehow, despite this being abundant and obvious, we still are pretending that
the only way to (say) learn French is to go six figures in debt and get a
French degree from an accredited university that has a massive staff. Same for
learning the Humanities, Physics or C++. The exceptions to this exist, but are
few.  
  
It is maddening.

Thanks to all for your discussion of a particular specific, bold, plan of
action. I find any such analysis to be superior to vague claims such as
"racism is bad, and isn't that sad" which seem to dominate so much of our
culture's discussion of race.  
  
It's entirely reasonable to challenge, and perhaps dismiss, any particular
plan of action. But the way to do that is to replace one plan with another,
not to merely content ourselves with rejectionism.  
  
What typically happens is that somebody will suggest some plan, everyone else
will immediately starting proclaiming it wrong, while offering no plan of
their own, and so nothing happens, and centuries of racial divide continues.  
  
For myself, I see no good reason why the top 1% of our society, who control at
least a third of the nation's wealth, and are those who have most benefited
from America's rigged system, should not lift up those who have been most
oppressed by it. Such an effort need not cost the average person a nickel, so
I see no good reason to sweep such an opportunity away with a wave of our
hands. Certainly we can add other plans in addition to this one, that would be
great.

Phil,  
  
Personally, I reject the conviction that commonly understood racism is some
overwhelming evil and the root cause of a seemingly ever-expanding list of
social ills to begin with. Pointing at differences in outcomes along racial
lines is not sufficient to establish that. It's extremely popular to regard it
as established beyond reasonable doubt, I grant. I'm willing to go against the
grain there.  
  
But what's interesting here is that, in spite of my view, I nevertheless *did*
offer an alternative -- after all, increased access to education is a worthy
goal itself. But you seem to have overlooked my suggestions. Perhaps it was
invisible precisely because it involved no massive wealth transfer to teachers
and activists. And if that's the reason it didn't even register, well. Doesn't
that say a lot?  
  
Incidentally, I have a very good reason, as a non-super-rich person, to
nevertheless oppose this plan that would supposedly target, exclusively, the
super-rich: if push comes to shove and it's decided that taking wealth for
some grand and noble purpose MUST be done, then I have other priorities for
that money.  
  
So yes, I'll sweep that opportunity away with a wave of my hands, and offer my
own opportunities in its place, if I must.

@Phil Tanny, I can appreciate the desire to avoid getting mired in perpetual
kvetching, but it is untrue that unless I can provide an alternative solution,
I have no right to dismiss or reject an idea.  
  
I also disagree with the problem statement and the premise that the solution
involves some kind of massive payout by the so-called 1%. First, a wealth
disparity between racial groups is not per se a problem to be solved. Second,
if it is a problem, it isn't necessarily the result of any kind of racism in
any tangible sense. It could be cultural, and I claim that the problem is
largely cultural (for example, Thomas Sowell, for example, opines that the
disintegration of the black family beginning in the 1960s, often assisted by
well-meaning social programs, has had a devastating effect on black Americans;
I would also mention ideologies of perpetual powerlessness and victimhood that
both demoralize and divert energy away from constructive activity toward
ineffectual grievance and blame). Third, even if it were racist, I don't see
what the rich have to do with it unless you can show that they employ racist
policies specifically to impoverish certain racial groups (the targeting of
the rich under the pretext that they benefit from a rigged system is the kind
of sloppy and unjust rationalization I would expect from a Marxist who foments
class conflict). Fourth, throwing money at problems is precisely what (per
Sowell) created much of the problems we're seeing today. NGOs, often run by
wealthy philanthropists, offer a relevant example of how funneling money and
free goods into causes can cause more damage than it solves (the destruction
of the Nigerian cotton and textile industry through mitumba, the destruction
of Haitian farming through free rice given long after a crisis has passed,
even something like the effect of TOMS on African shoe manufacturing and
repair). I'm not saying *charitable* work cannot help, but I would be very
suspicious of any "philanthropic" or even government-mandated solution given
their track record. More importantly, no amount of money can solve the basic
problem which, again, is cultural. Maybe Catholic missionaries could play a
role here. The Catholic Church is, after all, what turned even the pig-chasing
savages of Europe into something resembling a civilization. Only after the
Church has given structure to the mission to lift black America out of
spiritual and moral decay and, secondarily, poverty, does talk of money make
sense because only then can it be used and allocated prudently and with care.
But expect also a good deal of opposition from those who pretend to be
concerned for such minorities, especially when the Catholic Church is involved
and from those whose careers depend on maintaining the present status quo.

How confident are you that a) your reading represents the view of the book,
and b) that the papacy was uninterested as opposed to ill-informed or silent
(per your expectations) for other reasons?

I have absolutely no time nor interest to get into this in depth, but this I
have to point out:  
Ed's claim: the kind of slavery the black africans were subject to - chattel
slavery - was taught to be intrinsically evil  
Your claim: Popes actively supported the slavery of black africans  
The claim of the person you're quoting from: Popes ignored/ did nothing to
protect black africans

Hi Aizen and Oktavian,  
  
Aizen, you write:  
  
"Ed's claim: the kind of slavery the black africans were subject to - chattel
slavery - was taught to be intrinsically evil  
Your claim: Popes actively supported the slavery of black africans  
The claim of the person you're quoting from: Popes ignored/ did nothing to
protect black africans"  
  
Well, here's what Adiele's book, which I quoted from has to say on the subject
(see p. 469):  
  
"In the course of making this investigation, the basic question that guided
this work is: Did the popes of the Church actively involve themselves in the
enslavement of Black Africans during the Transatlantic slave trade? At the end
of this investigation, the findings from the historical sources available to
this study unfortunately tended to answer this basic question in the positive.
This slave trade was not only supported and approved by the Catholic  
Church but also received the blessings of the popes for a good number of
reasons."  
  
Commenting on Pope Nicholas V's bull, "Dum Diversas," the author writes (p.
313):  
  
"The remaining part of the main body of this Bull contained the very lines and
words which indicated the active role of the leadership of the Church in the
Black African enslavement."  
  
Oktavian: please don't accuse me of misrepresenting Adiele. I spent several
hours looking through his book online last night, before commenting on it. And
yes, I'm pretty confident of my interpretation of the author's views, as I
managed to skim through most of his book, focusing especially on the papacy.  
  
You might also want to read what the author says about the curse of Ham on pp.
166-191. It was endorsed by Pope Pius IX as late as 1873.  
  
Re chattel slavery: Aizen, if your only quarrel is with the kind of slavery
that claims to own a man's soul as well as his body, then I respectfully
submit that your claim is untenable in practice. The soul cannot be free
unless the body is. You cannot coherently claim to own a man's labor without
claiming to own the man himself. As Elizabeth Anscombe famously put it in her
inaugural lecture as Professor of Philosophy at Cambridge University in 1971,
titled, "Causality and Determination": "My actions are mostly physical
movements; if these physical movements are physically predetermined by
processes which I do not control, then my freedom is perfectly illusory." And
I might add: "if my physical movements are determined by the whims of a slave-
master whom I cannot control, then my freedom is perfectly illusory."

Having read this, the author fails to make the kind of fine distinctions that
Feser makes between the kinds of slavery the Church accepted as moral and the
kinds that didn't. It also argues that the Protestant tradition of the Curse
of Ham was a major influence on Catholic thought, which is kind of bonkers.  
  
All in all, for all of its "evidence", the author made a serious conceptual
error that rendered the entire argument a non-sequitur.

@Vincent Torley, I was being charitable to Adiele by giving him the benefit of
the doubt. I think that, given the current political climate, it is entirely
reasonable to be wary of "scholarship" on the subject of racism given how
easily academics churn out the most ridiculous tracts on the subject.

Hi Mister Geocon and Oktavian,  
  
Belief in the Curse of Ham has a long Catholic pedigree. Most of the following
quotations are taken from Adiele's book.  
  
Several Church Fathers (e.g. St. Basil of Caesarea, St. John Chrysostom, St.
Ambrose, St. Augustine of Hippo) all taught that the human institution of
slavery had its origin in Ham's sinfulness. They did not link this to Africa.
However, St. Jerome disturbingly refers to "Ethiopians" (Kushites) as "black
and cloaked in the filth of sin," adding: "At one time we were Ethiopians in
our vices and sins. How so? Because our sins had blackened us."  
  
Surprisingly, the first text to explicitly link the curse of Ham to Black
Africans was the Babylonian Talmud, completed around 600 AD.  
  
In the tenth century, Patriarch Eutychius of Alexandria (877-940) was the
first Christian Church leader to identify Black Africans as being among those
afflicted by the Curse of Ham:  
  
“Cursed be Ham, and may he be servant of his brothers...He himself and his
descendants, who are the Egyptians, the Negroes, the Ethiopians, and it is
said the  
Barbari.”  
  
According to the famous Christian geographical work "Cursor Mundi" (1300
A.D.), Noah's son Shem and his descendants were freemen who dwelt in Asia.
Japhet and his descendants were nobles and knights who came to live in Europe,
while "Ham, the accursed" and his descendants were slaves who were sent to
Africa.  
  
In the 15th century, the famous Portuguese chronicler Gomes Eannes de Azurara
(1410-1474) appealed to the writings of a 12th century archbishop of Toledo,
Rodrigo Jiménez de Rada (1170-1247) to support his contention that Black
Africans were doomed to servitude because they were the accursed descendants
of Ham:  
  
"The servitude of non-Muslim Moors (West Africans) resulted from the curse,
which,  
after the Deluge, Noah laid upon his son Ham, cursing him in this way: 'that
his race  
should be subject to all the other races of the world. And from his race these
Blacks are descended,' as wrote the Archbishop Don Roderick of Toledo and
Josephus in his Book on the Antiquities of the Jews, and Walter, with other
authors who have spoken of the generations of Noah from the time of his going
out of the Ark."  
  
In the 15th century, Dominican Friar Johannes Annius of Viterbo (1432-1502)
wrote that the curse of Ham forced him into exile in Africa: “As a result of
his sin, Ham is exiled to Africa.”  
  
In the 18th century, French biblical scholar and Benedictine abbot Augustine
Calmet (1672-1757) wrote in a work titled “Dictionary of the Holy Bible”
(1722): “Noah assigned to Ham the nations of Africa. The occasion of the color
of his sons was that Noah being one day asleep discovered his nakedness, and
Ham passed that way without covering him; on which accounts his descendants
are born with black complexion, and the gift of the prophecy was taken from
them.”  
  
In the 19th century, John England, the first Catholic bishop of Charleston,
USA, wrote in a letter to US Secretary of State John Forsyth (1780-1841) that
the enslavement of Black Africans was entirely lawful, because of the sin
committed by their ancestor, Ham:  
  
“Since every Catholic must accept Adam's fall as an essential ingredient in
the human condition, he should likewise believe that it certainly was not then
against the divine law for Shem and Japheth to use the services of the Black
race, since their progenitor had been cursed by God for his sinful conduct.”  
  
Finally, Pope Pius IX issued a Prayer for the Conversion of Africa through the
Office of the Sacred Congregation of Rites on October 2, 1873, in which he
declared: "“Let us pray for the most wretched Ethiopians in Central Africa,
that Almighty God may at length remove the curse of Cham from their hearts,
and grant them the blessing to be found only in Jesus Christ, our God and
Lord." This prayer came with a 300-day indulgence.  
  
Is it "kind of bonkers" to say that the Curse of Ham was a major influence on
Catholic thought? I think not.

WCB  
  
Excellent post. Kudos. Do not forget Nicholas V's bulls Dum diversas and
Romanus Pontifex that commanded Portugeuse kings to impose perpetual slavery
on Africans as pagans and thus enemies of God.  
  
WCB

Would you care to define “historically oppressed minorities”, or give a set of
criteria for choosing them?

That list would seem to include a good number of peoples. As a Pole, allow me
to submit my own people who, by the way, have never received a grosz of
compensation for what was effectively a 50 year Soviet occupation, for the
unfathomable destruction, savagery, and death caused by the Nazis and Soviets
during WWII, for the 18th century Partitions, for the massive destruction of
the Second Northern War, for the various massacres carried out by the Teutonic
Order, for the massacres carried out by the Mongols, for the slave trade (Ah,
yes. Didn't you know? The word "slave" comes from Slav. They were highly
prized.), etc, etc.  
  
Oh, and for all those Polish jokes.

How to define historically oppressed minorities? I wouldn't, as that would
seem to lead directly to a never ending 'who is the bigger victim'
competition. In the American context, I would aim practical remedies at the
two most significant victim groups, Black Americans and Native Americans.

 _and death caused by the Nazis and Soviets during WWII_  
  
Oh, the Polish participated in the Holocaust too. They were not just innocent
bystandards while the Germans did everything: Hitler didn't have that much
free time and extra hands and feet. Same thing with Croatians during the
Ustashe, which is why I'm not holding my breath for the canonization of Bl.
Aloysius Stepinac. This is also why I don't exactly admire Polish nationalist
saints like John Paul II, and it makes me wonder whether the Vatican hands out
halos too eagerly.  
  
Of course, there were many Croats and Poles who resisted the Holocaust, and
are included among the Righteous Among the Nations in the Yad va Shem
Holocaust Museum in Israel.

@Infinite Growth, there's that ignorant and vicious trope again. I'll bite,
though this is a digression as my point was to show that even much more
tangible claims toward restitution remain unaddressed if we wish to talk
restitution.  
  
Were there Poles who committed crimes during WWII, who went along with Nazi,
or Soviet, crimes? Obviously. I feel silly even having to state the obvious
because this is something that follows not from empirical fact, but from the
general proposition that the moral status of the actions of individuals during
wartime does not conform strictly to the divide of the front line. There were
righteous Germans and righteous Russians and wicked Poles. So what? Judas
betrayed Christ, but the Apostles on the whole or as a corporate body were not
agents of the Sanhedrin. We can say the same about Jews who betrayed both
their fellow Jews and committed crimes against gentile Poles, but we rarely
talk about those, so why the special pleading here?  
  
As a matter of empirical fact, we must remember things like:  
  
1\. The Polish state never collaborated with the Nazis. Compare that with
other European governments. This refusal to collaborate, and the formation of
Europe's largest resistance, happened at enormous cost. This, in addition to
Nazi crimes against the populace.  
2\. Even the number of only those Poles recognized by Yad Vashem outstrips the
combined number of people recognized from all other nations combined.
Proportion and scale matter.  
3\. The penalties for aiding Jews were uniquely and incomparably severe in
Poland (involving the execution of the person aiding, his family, maybe
neighbors, etc). And yet, point (2).  
4\. Poland was home to something like 80% of world Jewry at the time of the
war and the majority of the world's Jews for centuries. Any occurrence of
antipathy (and don't forget Jewish bigotry, which did exist) at the time of
the war was driven by economic, but also cultural, political, social, and
historical factors, not racial hatred. That is, there was no impulse to
exterminate any group and any crimes committed were isolated incidents of
criminal opportunism taken during the chaos of wartime, not systematic
programs of liquidation or some broad expression of national hatred. There
were also incidents where Poles were forced under threat of death to
participate in Nazi operations, incidents that some Jewish authors have
grotesquely misrepresented either maliciously or through incompetence (e.g.,
Jan Gross).  
  
So I think the claim you've made is unjust and irresponsible. Sadly, it also
plays into recent opportunistic politics.

N.b. I am the Anon that wrote the above post responding to @Infinite Growth (I
had selected "Anonymous" by accident from the drop down).  
  
To make clear what I meant by recent politics, take, for example, Act H.R.1226
and Senate Act S.447 through which certain organizations, with the aid of the
US government, are trying to extract massive sums of money from the Polish
state for so-called heirless property that once belonged to Jews. According to
both Polish law and the general legal principle followed virtually everywhere,
property without a legal heir reverts to the state after the death of its
owner. If a legal heir exists, he is free to pursue restitution like everyone
else through the Polish courts. The absurd position of certain groups is that
the Polish government should treat these cases in a extraordinary way and
offer broad restitution anyway, not to any heirs, because of course they don't
exist, but to organizations and people who are not legal heirs. And recall
that this was property held by Polish citizens as Polish Jews were Polish
citizens. By reinforcing the notion that Poles, as a corporate body, are
guilty of collaborating in the criminal program of the Nazis, it becomes
easier to make claims on the Polish state. Heirless property, combined with a
sprinkle of customary special pleading, misrepresentation, and the thought-
diffusing VIP pass that is the word "Holocaust", provides a convenient
opportunity for unscrupulous organizations to illegitimately extract billions
of dollars from the Polish state by exploiting the emotional force of a
historical tragedy. Perhaps such organizations should instead direct their
claims to Berlin as the German state is responsible for handling the
restitution of Jewish property lost through actions of the Nazi regime. As I
mentioned already, the Poles have not received a dime of restitution for the
absolute obliteration of their country, its cities, its cultural heritage, not
to mention the torture, exploitation, and deaths of millions of its citizens,
Jew and gentile alike.

"Oh, the Polish participated in the Holocaust too."  
  
One word: Kapo.

 _One word: Kapo_  
  
At the Belsen Trial, Joseph Kramer and 44 other kapos were found guilty of war
crimes, so no, that doesn't exonerate them. :)

I wasn't trying to exonerate them. I'm more than happy to talk about their
complicity, in fact. The Poles were victims of the Holocaust. If someone wants
to talk about the crimes of particular Poles, we can start talking about the
crimes of the Kapo. And maybe we'll bring the Soviets into the mix too.  
  
In fact, perhaps we should do that regardless.

According to conventional American history, the USA became great because it
was a self-made country built by the Protestant work ethic. According to Dr.
Martin Luther King the USA became great because we exploited black slaves and
poor immigrants. :)

When based on a lie, a sound reasoning can be used to reach any conclusion,
true or otherwise.  
  
Small example: is the statement "if 1=2 then 37=-1" true or false? It is
actually true and simple to demonstrate using some arithmetic rules:  
Step 1: 1=2 (deduct 1 from both sides)  
Step 2: 0=1 (multiply both sides by 38)  
Step 3: 0=38 (deduct 1 from both sides)  
Step 4: -1=37 q.e.d.  
  
In short, "if A then B" is always true if A is false. All you need to do is to
convince someone that A is actually true so that with sound reasoning you may
conclude any consequence B at your convenience.

BERTAND RUSSELL: From a falsehood any statement can be derived.  
  
HECKLER: Prove that if 2=1 then you are the Pope!  
  
BERTRAND RUSSELL: The pope and I are two, therefore the Pope and I are one.

In another 30 or 40 yrs we white people will no longer be the majority race.

WCB  
  
Logical explosion. From contradictions, any thing can follow. Including
nonsense and untruths. This has been well known from the middle ages by
logicians  
  
Goggle logical explosion for more.  
  
WCB

The paradox of the material implication seems to belie this fact. "If the moon
is made of green cheese then I will grow 800ft", when analyzed with respect to
truth functionality, is true. But most people would say it's false, because
the consequent has no logical connection to the antecedent.

Yes, there does seem to be a problem in referring to the consequent as
"following from" the false antecedent. Certainly the consequent isn't being
_caused by_ the antecedent.  
  
One of the other problems is that the "proof" of the consequent always runs
through a statement or series of statements that _hold in normal conditions_ ,
but it is unclear that they ALSO hold in conditions that obtain with the false
antecedent. In the above example given by our esteemed Anonymous above, if we
assume 1=2, does it STILL remain true that "equals subtracted from equals make
equals", which he uses to get the second step? Maybe not. So then you have to
hypothesize not only "1=2" but also "and all the usual rules of arithmetic
remain valid". But that, of course, is the difficulty: if 1=2, it seems
unlikely that we can simply "let" all the other rules remain intact. So then
that calls the assertions of the intervening steps into doubt.

@Tony:  
  
"In the above example given by our esteemed Anonymous above, if we assume 1=2,
does it STILL remain true that "equals subtracted from equals make equals",
which he uses to get the second step? Maybe not."  
  
The sentence between quotes is a special instance of "substitution of equals"
principle; it can be stated as an implication "forall x, y : x = y => f x = f
y" where f is a function (1), which in turn is a reflection of the mantra
"first order logic is extensional".  
  
Technical note(s):  
(1) you can even universally quantify over f, which redounds to the
indiscernability of identicals; but then, depending on how exactly you are
setting things up, you are moving to second order logic which is generally not
a good idea because important results like the compactness theorem fail; but
this can be worked around in a number of ways.

@Infinite_Growth:  
  
"Second order logic is not logic."  
  
I take it that what you mean here is something analogous to "A rubber duck is
not a duck" which hinges on what one means by a logic.  
  
Whatever the criteria you have in mind, that is *not* the route commonly taken
in mathematical logic, for better or worse; it would void and null things like
abstract model theory, Lindstrom's theorem, etc. Just open a textbook like
Mendelson's "Introduction to mathematical logic" (If I remember correctly he
treats second-order logic in an appendix).

 _The sentence between quotes is a special instance of "substitution of
equals" principle; it can be stated as an implication "forall x, y : x = y = >
f x = f y" where f is a function_  
  
G-rod, I would suggest that the principle only holds within a constrained ,
limited context, and not absolutely - for the reason that "equals" does not
inherently mean "the same in every possible respect". In the realm of
quantity, if you are speaking of one aspect of the two referents x and y, x=y
may well imply f(x) = f(y) because you have limited the context of the "is
equal" itself. But it doesn't hold in every respect if x is not the same as y
**in every respect**. If x is "8" and y is "4 + 4" and z is "3 + 5", then they
are not the same in respect of "expressed as a whole singular" versus
"expressed as a sum of equal parts" or "expressed as a sum of primes", and a
function that operated on them **in respect of the expression rather than in
respect of the total quantity would not yield the same results. It would seem
to be an _assumption_ that "equals" implies "identicals". **

@Infinite_Growth, @WCB, @Tony, @grodrigues  
  
Thank you for all commentary over my simple "if 1=2 then..." post. My
intention was to illustrate metaphorically what seems to me, perhaps
innadequatelly, the present practice of public discourse, in that the
truthfullness of the premise - antecedent - seldom seems to be unequivocally
established, e.g. the measures during the so-called pandemic are a consequence
of a premise that does not appear to have been fully True. Rather, the premise
was not prone to be falsifiable thus falling outside potential classification
as a scientific theory - following Karl Popper. So, in this case the statement
"it is scientifically proven we have a pandemic therefore your freedom need to
be culled" is true becayse the antecedent cannot be proven to be true.  
  
Thank you again.

@Tony:  
  
"I would suggest that the principle only holds within a constrained , limited
context, and not absolutely - for the reason that "equals" does not inherently
mean "the same in every possible respect". In the realm of quantity, if you
are speaking of one aspect of the two referents x and y, x=y may well imply
f(x) = f(y) because you have limited the context of the "is equal" itself. But
it doesn't hold in every respect if x is not the same as y in every respect.
If x is "8" and y is "4 + 4" and z is "3 + 5", then they are not the same in
respect of "expressed as a whole singular" versus "expressed as a sum of equal
parts" or "expressed as a sum of primes""  
  
The = sign *does* stand for identical; the names in both sides of the sign
name the same, identical thing. As far as your putative counter-examples, I
would say in response you are no longer talking about "8" or even "8" under
some aspect, but of some other thing altogether that is somehow related to "8"
-- expression trees, additive or prime decompositions, partitions, or whatever
else you have in mind.  
  
I should clarify that I am *not* dismissing any criticisms of first order
logic, or even saying that this way of talking is the best way of talking in
every possible practical and theoretical subject. To give a simple, obvious
example, as far as I know there is no good satisfactory account of intensional
contexts. This way of talking entails no contradictions (or at least any
obvious ones) and is especially useful in mathematics though; part of the
reasons are certainly contingent and reflect the way how mathematicians are
trained, but I would contend that they also reflect a deep intuition.
Mathematical objects are simple in the sense that their identity conditions
are sharp and clearly delineated -- they are the furthest removed from the
material. Virtually all of mathematics can be formalized in ZFC, possibly with
some extra large cardinal axioms; *equality* itself can be defined in terms of
the other primitives (in symbols: x = y iff forall z, z e x <=> z e y). In
this setting, we have: (1) *everything* is a set and (2) *everything* can be
constructed bottom up from the empty set via (possibly transfinite) iteration.
This is a large amount of reduction and simplification, yielding a powerful
framework. But to circle back to the criticisms, it also has its downsides.
Now suddenly, it make senses to ask the non-sensical question if the number 5
is an element of the number 1023. This question has a definite truth value but
its value depends on the specific, non-essential details of the construction
of the natural numbers in ZFC.

