One little footnote… I think some anti-theists, new atheists – whatever you
want to call them – are sometimes operating under the assumption that the most
widely-subscribed forms of theism are truer to the core ideas of theism or
Christianity than the “watered-down” forms that I’m considering to be more
defensible. I’d very much like to have that argument out in the open, so
please – make that argument explicitly, if that’s what you think. I probably
won’t be entirely unsympathetic to it. After all, we’re talking about
_revealed_ religion. Are we supposed to believe that God revealed it poorly?
If God is concerned with his followers having the right beliefs – say, if
salvation depended on it – it would be really weird if the right beliefs were
held only by a tiny minority of theists. (Nevertheless, I think that theists
who represent the best that the tradition has to offer possess resources for
answering these sorts of problems that fundamentalists lack. As I said, I’d
very much like to have this debate with nonbelievers out in the open rather
than try to guess the specifics of their thinking.)

The core of chrsitanity is that anyone who disagrees with a god that can’t be
shown to exist will be punished and that this god needed a blood sacrifice by
torture to make itself happy. So your claim ““There are no plausible versions
of theism! They’re all equally implausible!” This is why you’re perceived as
idiots. If you can’t detect any difference between I Don’t Have Enough Faith
to Be an Atheist by Frank Turek and The Existence of God by Richard Swinburne,
that’s a you-problem.” is nonsense. Swinburne is like Tillich, etc, inventing
a god that is so vague it can’t be shown to exist or not.

If you’re more activist-oriented, then you’re probably concerned with fighting
religious abuses, maintaining the separation of church and state, protecting
education from the influence of religious fundamentalists, and liberating
people from the illegitimate constraints placed on them by religious
authorities and tradition. If it isn’t obvious, I gladly join hands with these
people. But if you’re _primarily_ concerned with these goals, there may be
trade-offs with regard to another goal: Uncovering the truth about theism.

[CA107 The Participation Theodicy — w/ John
Buck](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/11/17/ca107-the-
participation-theodicy-w-john-buck/ "The participation theodicy holds,
reasonably enough, that it would be good to create an ideal world. Since it
would be good for God to do so, it would also be good for us to do so \(as
well as any other beings\). The goodness would only be multiplied through our
participation and contribution to the … Continue reading CA107 The
Participation Theodicy — w/ John \[…\]")

Huemer, after discussing paradoxes of omnipotence in his book, [_Knowledge,
Reality, and Value_](https://www.amazon.com/Knowledge-Reality-Value-Mostly-
Philosophy/dp/B091F5QTDS), shared a few thoughts that I think have wider
relevance to the discussion of theism vs. atheism:

[CA105 Responding to Trent Horn’s “5 Atheist Double
Standards”](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/09/07/ca105-responding-
to-trent-horns-5-atheist-double-standards/ "This is my response to Catholic
apologist Trent Horn’s recent video entitled “5 Atheist Double Standards.”
\(The first minute is a cold open. It makes more sense if you’re watching the
video version.\) Watch on YouTube Interview on the Sentientism podcast The
Meager Moral Fruits Argument My devil’s advocate debate Follow me on Twitter
@waldenpod … Continue rea \[…\]")

On this podcast and in my life, the balance may tilt a little more towards
pursuing the truth and a lot less towards harm-reduction, since I spend more
time thinking about universalist Christianity and the best arguments for
theism, even though neither of those things wield any influence at all in the
Christian communities in which I was raised. I don’t care, because the
Christian worldview espoused in those communities is obviously false. But to
think that refuting a literalist form of Christianity means Christianity is
false is a mistake. If you spend all your time fighting those forms of
Christianity, you’re not getting any closer to the right answer. You’re just
spending your finite time meditating on one particular bad answer. Which,
depending on how harmful and prevalent it is, might be a good way to spend
your time – provided that you’re willing to make that trade-off.

> These sorts of puzzles are entertaining but of no deep import. The most they
> should be able to accomplish is to make the theist refine his definitions
> [of God], which means that they do not get to the heart of the dispute
> between theists and atheists. It is reasonable for the theist to respond to
> these sorts of puzzles by refining definitions so as to eliminate the
> puzzles, because in general, a good definition should (usually) not be
> contradictory. Thus, if someone succeeds in showing that the traditional
> definition of “God” is contradictory, that just shows that it’s a poor
> definition, and we should replace it with a definition that isn’t
> contradictory.
>
> There are limits to this. If the traditional conception of God is so
> confused that there is nothing anywhere close to it that is logically
> coherent, then we should just declare that there is no God. But if there is
> something in the neighborhood that is coherent, then we should interpret
> “God” as having one of the coherent meanings that is close to what is
> traditionally said about God. That’s because our purpose is to learn, not
> merely to score points against people. The way to learn is to address the
> most interesting defensible views, not to spend our time discussing
> trivially false ideas.

****You are commenting using your Facebook account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'facebook' \);) / Change
)

A Christian who is actually consistent in this regard, David Bentley Hart, has
written scathingly about both:

****You are commenting using your Twitter account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'twitter' \);) / Change
)

“Ken Ham is wrong” is not synonymous with “Christianity is false,” even though
some seem to think it is. “Frank Turek is an overconfident moron” is
undoubtedly true, but that doesn’t mean God doesn’t exist. How is this not
totally obvious?

In the past, I’ve defended new atheism from its critics on the grounds that
new atheism was a socio-political-cultural response to the malignant influence
of certain strains of fundamentalism. It was _not_ an attempt to contribute to
cutting edge analytic philosophy of religion. On the existence of God, they
helped cross off a couple bad answers, if we’re being generous. But I can’t
ignore the fact that many fans of the new atheists wouldn’t like my defense,
since they clearly think the new atheists put the entire issue to bed. Before
I knew anything about the debates that have taken place at the highest level
for centuries, I thought something similar. The forms of theism that the new
atheists reacted to, however, do not represent the best that theism can offer.

****You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'wordpress' \);) /
Change )

There were quite a few subjects raised that are worth addressing further. I
could have made an episode like this one aimed instead at theists who have
mostly concerned themselves with attacking the most popular forms of atheism
rather than the best forms of atheism. It’s not as if the overconfident
theists in the apologetics space have engaged with Paul Draper, Graham Oppy,
J.L. Schellenberg, or J.H. Sobel. Most of the loudmouths online haven’t done
their due diligence, regardless of whether they’re theists or atheists.

[Debate Breakdown w/ Ben Burgis: Christopher Hitchens vs. David
Berlinski](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/08/31/debate-breakdown-
w-ben-burgis-christopher-hitchens-vs-david-berlinski/ "This is my appearance
on Ben Burgis’s channel. Ben and I listen to and comment on a debate between
Christopher Hitchens and David Berlinkski over the motion “Atheism poisons
everything.” The video Linktree")

[CA108 Psychophysical Harmony, Physicalism, & God w/ Brian
Cutter](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/11/30/ca108-psychophysical-
harmony-physicalism-god-w-brian-cutter/ "Dr. Brian Cutter joins me to discuss
his paper, ‘Psychophysical Harmony: A New Argument for Theism‘, coauthored
with Dr. Dustin Crummett. After talking about epiphenomenalism and why William
James’ argument against it works against all views in philosophy of mind
\(with the lone exception of Type-A materialism\), we explain why
psychophysical harmony seems so \[…\]")

this strikes me as nothing more than the courtiers claim that there is at all
a “best form” aka “sophisticated theology”. All claims for the existences of
gods fail since they have no evidence for their claims at all.

I hasten to add that there’s nothing wrong with spending time wrestling with
popular-level apologetics – even if your goal is to get to the truth of the
matter – assuming that those apologists represent a worldview that is a live
option for you. If the more popular material is interacting with what _you_
believe (or recently believed), then it makes perfect sense to spend your time
with those videos, podcasts, texts, and so on. For me, it used to be a big
deal that a certain narrow conception of Christianity was false. But since I
wanted to figure out whether or not God exists, I didn’t _stop_ there.
Refuting the version of Christianity that I used to believe is frankly not
that hard. If you want your rejection of Christianity to be rational, you
should engage with the best of what Christians have to offer. Camping out on
the least plausible versions forever doesn’t actually advance your
understanding beyond eliminating a couple bad options. At worst, it’s deeply
dishonest to refute the worst version of an idea, stop there, and act as if
the entire idea has been refuted.

  *     * [ ![](https://emersongreenblog.files.wordpress.com/2017/08/cropped-ca-logo-darker.png?w=50) Emerson Green ](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com)

The main issue with the activists is that they seem to think they’re the best
at both projects, despite never engaging with the strongest versions of
theism. Unfortunately, some are incapable of admitting that there is any
gradient of quality in the first place. I’m sure some of them are reading and
thinking, “There are no plausible versions of theism! They’re all equally
implausible!” This is why you’re perceived as idiots. If you can’t detect any
difference between _I Don’t Have Enough Faith to Be an Atheist_ by Frank Turek
and _The Existence of God_ by Richard Swinburne, that’s a you-problem. But
let’s be honest, you haven’t read the latter – or if you did, you didn’t have
the tools to understand it. That’s why you think there’s no gradient, and that
all forms of theism – everything from Lee Strobel’s theism to David Bentley
Hart’s theism – are equally implausible.

People in my position are often harsh to the activist-oriented crowd, but
that’s not because I’m against their project. It’s because there’s often false
advertising on their side. Virtually all atheists (this includes atheist
podcasts, blogs, and channels) claim to be able to provide good reasons to
disbelieve (or lack belief) in God or gods. This includes those who don’t
primarily concern themselves with apologetics or philosophy of religion. The
problem is their insistence that they have provided good reasons to reject
theism without ever engaging with the best versions of theism! If you want
your rejection of x to seem warranted, you should engage with the best form of
x, not the worst. It makes no difference to add that it’s a very popular or
very harmful version of x. It doesn’t matter. If you’re extremely confident in
your atheism, and yet you’ve never looked at the strongest forms of theism,
then you’re a dogmatic idiot.

[Sentientism Interview (pt. 2) ](https://audioboom.com/posts/8152946 "
linktr.ee/emersongreen  Subscribe on YouTube  Consider supporting the show on
Patreon here or Counter Apologetics here  Listen to our sister show, Counter
Apologetics here  Music by ichika Nito and used with permission.  Full
interview on the Sentientism podcast  Twitter @waldenpod @OnPanpsychism ")

[58 - Defending Libertarian Free Will w/ Necessary Being & John
Buck](https://audioboom.com/posts/8139889 "I'm joined by two proponents of
libertarian free will to discuss determinism, the phenomenology of free
choices, how "ought implies can" could prove we have the ability to do
otherwise, and much else.  linktr.ee/emersongreen YouTube Support the podcast
at patreon.com/waldenpod or /counter Listen to our sister show, Counter
Apologetics here Mus \[…\]")

> The utter inconsequentiality of contemporary atheism is a social and
> spiritual catastrophe. Something splendid and irreplaceable has taken leave
> of our culture—some great moral and intellectual capacity that once inspired
> the more heroic expressions of belief and unbelief alike. Skepticism and
> atheism are, at least in their highest manifestations, noble, precious, and
> even necessary traditions, and even the most fervent of believers should
> acknowledge that both are often inspired by a profound moral alarm at evil
> and suffering, at the corruption of religious institutions, at psychological
> terrorism, at injustices either prompted or abetted by religious doctrines,
> at arid dogmatisms and inane fideisms, and at worldly power wielded in the
> name of otherworldly goods. In the best kinds of unbelief, there is
> something of the moral grandeur of the prophets—a deep and admirable
> abhorrence of those vicious idolatries that enslave minds and justify our
> worst cruelties.
>
> [_Believe It or Not
> (2010)_](https://www.firstthings.com/article/2010/05/believe-it-or-not)

> Contrary to conventional wisdom, Christianity has never really taken deep
> root in America or had any success in forming American consciousness; in its
> place, we have invented a kind of Orphic mystery religion of personal
> liberation, fecundated and sustained by a cult of Mammon.
>
> _[Three Cheers for Socialism
> (2020)](https://www.commonwealmagazine.org/three-cheers-socialism)_

[Discussion on
Miracles](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2023/01/09/miracles-panel/
"Friendly debate between three miracle skeptics and a theist.
linktr.ee/emersongreen Subscribe on YouTube Listen to our sister show, Walden
Pod here Music by ichika Nito & Whalers. Used with permission. Follow on
Twitter @waldenpod Consider supporting the show on Patreon here or Walden Pod
here")

The boring but entirely true answer is that it depends on what your goals are.
If you have goal A, then action Y makes sense. If you have goal B, then action
Z makes sense, and doing Y might seem bizarre. If you’re concerned with
activism and improving the world, then you should spend your time differently
than someone who’s concerned purely with figuring out what’s true. Most
atheists care about both, and virtually podcast, blog, and YouTube channel
dips into both subjects. As is so often the case, there are unavoidable trade-
offs in how you spend your finite time. Trying to reduce the harm caused by
religion is a good thing – it’s a public service. But focusing on what’s
widely accepted in the pews is not the same thing as trying to figure out
whether God exists. The most widely adopted version of theism is not _also_
the most plausible version of theism.

There’s just not much overlap between what I’m calling the activist project
and the project of getting closer to the truth about theism. But the trade-
offs needn’t be too serious. Maybe you’re dunking on Turek as one hobby among
others for the common good, while you strive to engage the best of theism in
your downtime. If so, that’s great. Unfortunately, it doesn’t seem like that’s
what many activists are actually doing.

There are three variables that tend to influence the conversation here:
Popularity, plausibility, and harm. If you max out on plausibility, then
popularity has likely taken a big hit, and vice versa. If a belief is
unpopular, implausible, and benign, then your time would be better spent
engaging with something else. But if you alter any of those variables, I think
there’s a decent reason to address it. Still, depending on what you care about
_the most_ , different actions make sense. A balance needs to be struck
between these distinct projects, especially if you intend on doing them well.
Assuming you want to be good at whatever it is you’re doing, both projects are
time-consuming.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F01%2F25%2Faddressing-popular-forms-of-theism-vs-the-best-forms%2F&signup_flow=account)

Why can’t we just agree that we’re doing different things? When two people
have different goals, it won’t make sense to act in the same way. It’s not as
if the activist crowd is unconcerned with the truth – the activists are
generally more concerned with attacking the truth _of influential beliefs_
that make the world worse. (This is entirely sensible.) Philosophers are
generally more concerned with addressing the best versions of each side, since
that’s the best way of figuring out whether we should be theists, atheists, or
agnostics. (This is entirely sensible.) Again, my main issue with the activist
crowd is that they seem to think they’re the best at both, despite never
engaging with the strongest versions of the view they reject.

[Sentientism Interview (pt. 1) ](https://audioboom.com/posts/8152944 "
linktr.ee/emersongreen  Subscribe on YouTube  Consider supporting the show on
Patreon here or Counter Apologetics here  Listen to our sister show, Counter
Apologetics here  Music by ichika Nito and used with permission.  Full
interview on the Sentientism podcast  Twitter @waldenpod @OnPanpsychism ")

Unlike many activists, I think there’s no reason to disparage the activist
project _or_ the philosophical project. The best exemplars of both are
admirable. And as stated earlier, the trade-offs don’t need to be serious.
Maybe you were freed from the constraints of fundamentalism by others, so you
spend a lot of your time trying to do the same for others. That doesn’t mean
you can’t also spend time actually trying to figure out whether God exists.
However, assuming you want to do whatever you’re doing well, these projects
will occupy a lot of time, which is why the trade-offs exist to begin with.
It’s not that these projects are _incompatible_ ; they’re just distinct from
one another and we only have a finite amount of time in this life. You get to
decide what that time will be occupied by. What kind of balance will you
strike? How much of your time will be occupied by the worst forms of theism,
and how much by the best?

Some atheists are primarily concerned with helping others. As a result, they
see no point in spending time on things that have no significant influence in
the world. Other atheists are primarily concerned with getting to the truth of
the matter. As a result, they see no point in beating up on creationism,
literalism, inerrantism, and other ideas that to them seem trivially false.
Whether or not God exists does not hang on whether inerrantism is true! It
doesn’t depend on whether this or that harmful form of fundamentalism makes
any sense. You could be _right_ that a particular form of Christianity is
false and harmful. And yet, it’s entirely possible that God exists, and will
someday say “Well done, good and faithful servant” to those who fought the
evil committed in his name.

[61 - The Vagueness Argument Against Physicalism
](https://audioboom.com/posts/8216604 "When did consciousness first evolve? If
physicalism is true, we’d expect it to have evolved gradually, just as other
complex biological phenomena evolved gradually. But the transition from
feeling nothing to feeling something couldn’t have been gradual. No matter how
minimal a conscious experience is, if it’s “like something” to exist –
anything at all – it’ \[…\]")

[59 - Metaethics & Moral Realism w/ Michael
Huemer](https://audioboom.com/posts/8157791 "Dr. Michael Huemer joins me to
discuss moral realism vs. antirealism, ethical intuitionism, phenomenal
conservatism, moral disagreement, and much else in moral philosophy.  Ethical
Intuitionism  Knowledge, Reality, and Value: A Mostly Common Sense Guide to
Philosophy  William Lane Craig vs. Erik Wielenberg  Linktree / The Five
Metaethical Positions /  Noncog \[…\]")

[57 - Is Utilitarianism the Only Good Ethical Theory? w/ Matthew Adelstein
](https://audioboom.com/posts/8138436 "I'm joined by Matthew Adelstein of
Deliberation Under Ideal Conditions for Utilitarianism 101. We also talk about
a few basic things everyone needs to know to be conversant in moral
philosophy.  YouTube Matthew's Channel  Matthew's Blog \(Bentham's Bulldog\)
Consider supporting the show on Patreon here or Counter Apologetics here
Listen to \[…\]")

To pursue the question of God’s existence, we must engage with the better
forms of theism, which will probably not have [multi-million dollar theme
parks dedicated to them](https://arkencounter.com/). As Michael Huemer put it,
“Who cares if you can refute the craziest version of a view? … The way to
learn is to address the most interesting defensible views, not to spend our
time discussing trivially false ideas.” Even if those trivially false ideas
are widespread, wield lots of influence in the world, and are positively
dangerous, they’re still trivially false. If your primary goal is to uncover
the nature of reality, it doesn’t make any sense to spend your finite time
attacking less plausible versions of theism, even if they’re more popular and
harmful. The (uncomfortable to some) consequence of this is that you’re bound
to spend time examining views of that world that very few people believe in.
If you’re more activist-oriented, this seems totally absurd. Why would you
waste time talking about something that wields no influence and that people
aren’t affected by? If no one in the pews would accept it, why spend time
thinking about it? On the other hand, if you’re simply pursuing the truth, it
seems wasteful to spend time talking about beliefs that are obviously false –
their popularity and harmfulness is irrelevant.

When I first started thinking about apologetics way back when, I said that my
main concern was the truth: I just wanted to know whether or not God exists. I
still hold that aim. However, I used to be a lot more of an anti-theist. I
shared Bertrand Russell’s sentiment expressed in _Why I Am Not A Christian_ :
“I am as firmly convinced that religions do harm as I am that they are
untrue.” And today, even though I wouldn’t call myself an anti-theist, I still
believe that there are obviously harmful forms of religion, including quite
popular forms of fundamentalism. But combating harmful and widespread forms of
fundamentalism is not all that related to the first goal of figuring out
whether theism is true. They’re two distinct projects: Figuring out the way
the world is and trying to make the world a better place.

Freeing others from the illegitimate spiritual and moral and intellectual
constraints placed on them by religion is a commendable way to spend one’s
time. (There are religious people who do that as well – I’ve met many of them
in philosophy of religion.) I also think it matters whether or not God exists,
so that’s an interesting way to spend one’s time as well. Yet, those who are
focused on the truth of the matter are often perceived as elitist by the
activist crowd, and the activists are often perceived as idiots by the
philosopher crowd.

[60 - Why I Support Abolition of the Death
Penalty](https://audioboom.com/posts/8208259 "In many ways, I'm the ideal
audience for apologists of capital punishment. I believe in free will, I think
human beings are responsible for their actions, I’m not opposed to retribution
in all cases, I believe there are virtuous qualities to revenge, and I think
some people deserve to die. However, none of that is enough to justify the
death penalty sys \[…\]")

Theists often bemoan the low quality of contemporary public atheism. In a way,
I agree with them. But they’re not blameless. Contemporary atheism wasn’t
formed in a vacuum: It’s a _response_ to contemporary theism. Most atheists
are former believers who left the faith; what they’re responding to is their
idea of Christianity, which they formed as a part of the Christianity
community. You can criticize the quality of contemporary atheism _and_
contemporary Christianity, but you can’t just criticize atheism without
acknowledging one of the major reasons it is the way it is. There’s no
coherent way to dissociate the shallowness of contemporary atheism from the
shallowness of contemporary theism, specifically Christianity.

[Metaethics & Moral Realism w/ Michael
Huemer](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/09/26/metaethics-moral-
realism-w-michael-huemer/ "Dr. Michael Huemer joins me to discuss moral
realism vs. antirealism, ethical intuitionism, phenomenal conservatism, moral
disagreement, and much else in moral philosophy. \(This aired originally on
YouTube and Walden Pod.\) Ethical Intuitionism Knowledge, Reality, and Value:
A Mostly Common Sense Guide to Philosophy William Lane Craig vs. Erik
Wielenberg Link \[…\]")

A topic like this often leads to the value of philosophy, since – surprise,
surprise – virtually all of these overconfident morons hate philosophy. But
the highest-level discussion of theism vs. atheism is mostly going to take
place in philosophy. The reason for this is that thinking hard about the
question, analyzing every relevant concept and assumption with a microscopic
attention to detail is basically a description of analytic philosophy. So if
you think concepts are best left unclear, and assumptions best left unstated
and unexamined, then you should look somewhere other than analytic philosophy
to explore the question.

These are both worthwhile, but there’s a dispute over them between many
atheists. This conflict is something I used to wrestle with internally quite a
bit: Should we address _popular_ versions of theism – beliefs that are
widespread and have the most influence in the world? Or should we address the
_best, most defensible_ versions of theism, which are bound to be less
popular?

[CA106 One Hell of a Problem – w/ Real Atheology & Counter
Apologist](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/10/07/ca106-one-hell-of-
a-problem-w-real-atheology-counter-apologist-2/ "I’m joined by Counter
Apologist and Ryan from Real Atheology to discuss eternal conscious torment.
First, we take a closer look at the views of William Lane Craig, who famously
denies the possibility of an actual infinite in the context of the kalam, yet
seems to argue that the guilt of those who reject God … Continue reading CA106
One Hell of a Problem – w/ \[…\]")

[CA109 Meager Moral Fruits w/ Real
Atheology](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/12/28/ca109-meager-
moral-fruits-w-real-atheology/ "Ben Watkins of Real Atheology joins me to
discuss the meager moral fruits argument, a few objections to the argument,
and why we’re interested in it in the first place. Subscribe to Real Atheology
on YouTube and on iTunes  Follow us on Twitter @waldenpod @RealAtheology
@SpeedWatkins  Subscribe on YouTube Listen to our sister show, Walden …
Continue reading C \[…\]")

Host of Walden Pod and Counter Apologetics. [ View all posts by Emerson Green
](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/author/emersongreenblog/)

To recap, I made the controversial claim that there is a distinction between
the best and worst forms of theism, that we only have a finite amount of time
on the earth, and that most people seem to err on the side of using that time
to address the worst rather than the best. Personally, I don’t care what kind
of trade-off you make in your personal or public life, so long as you don’t
pretend that you’ve debunked theism merely by addressing a few harmful forms
that you have the most personal experience with.

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[argument from evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-from-
evil/), [atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheism vs mormonism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism-vs-
mormonism/), [atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[atheist vs mormon](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist-vs-
mormon/), [christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christian vs mormon](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian-vs-
mormon/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[christianity vs
mormonism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity-vs-
mormonism/), [counter
apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-apologetics/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/),
[harris](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/harris/),
[implausible](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/implausible/),
[lds](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/lds/), [lds
explained](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/lds-explained/),
[mormon](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mormon/),
[mormonism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mormonism/), [mormonism
explained](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mormonism-explained/),
[naturalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/naturalism/),
[naturalist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/naturalist/), [problem
of evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/problem-of-evil/),
[Religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religion/), [Sam
Harris](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/sam-harris/)

_Christianity plus a lot of weird, implausible things._ I think that’s an
accurate summation of how many view Mormonism. But I’ve come to believe that
it’s entirely mistaken.

Of course, Harris is correct in saying that Theory A is objectively more
plausible than Theory B if Theory B is just Theory A + a few additional
implausible claims. He’s wrong, however, in thinking that this maps on to
Christianity and Mormonism in the way he presents it. If anything, he has it
backwards.

This is not “Christianity plus implausible stuff” – this is Christianity
_minus_ implausible stuff. Unless, that is, you consider eternal conscious
torment, creation _ex nihilo_ , and the baffling notion that our world was
created by a _perfect being_ to be valuable aspects of Christianity that
somehow increase its plausibility.

Rather than forwarding creation _ex nihilo_ , Mormons – along with many
atheists – believe the universe is eternal. For Latter-day Saints, God is a
part of nature rather than outside it. God organized our universe from pre-
existing material. Consequently, Mormons do not defend the kalam cosmological
argument.

> “Mormonism is objectively less credible than Christianity, because Mormons
> are committed to believing nearly all the implausible things that Christians
> believe plus many additional implausible things.”

Many of the shortcomings of the LDS worldview are shortcoming of all forms of
Christianity. For example, a literalist approach to the holy text will yield
numerous conflicts with history and science. (Many theists seem to think this
is a unique problem for Mormonism.) This is an important point if we’re
playing this game of “Which version of Christianity is the most plausible?” In
nearly every case, Mormonism is either on equal(ish) footing with other forms
of Christianity – and therefore no less plausible – or it has an advantage
over its Christian rivals.

Due to their differences with other Christians regarding the nature of God,
Latter-day Saints don’t defend the ontological argument. Their rejection of
perfect being theism and their analysis of omnipotence (which effectively
renders Mormon God less powerful than Catholic and Protestant God) opens up
new avenues in responding to arguments from evil that are not available to
other Christians. For me, this is a pretty big deal, since arguments from evil
provide the best reasons for rejecting theism.

Strikingly, Mormons reject the notion of eternal conscious torment for non-
Christians. Universalism (or something like it) is the default view in the LDS
Church.

Here’s a bonus advantage: The soul-building theodicy [makes for a better fit
within LDS theology](https://youtu.be/nCBD7q5FNe0?t=4184), especially if one
views God as the basis of all value.

Moreover, Latter-day Saints are on at least slightly better footing in making
design arguments, since the designer they posit has a greater basis in
experience relative to the supernatural, non-physical, maximally perfect
designer posited by other Christians.

Growing up, I didn’t know much about the LDS Church. I heard it described as a
“cult” during the 2012 presidential election. Even as a good protestant, I
disagreed. After becoming an atheist a few years later, I still viewed
Mormonism as a breakaway sect of Christianity, though I shared the following
sentiment [with Sam Harris](https://www.samharris.org/blog/response-to-
controversy):

Mormons also believe in evolution, even the evolution (progress) of your
spirit. You can evolve in the next life to become a god.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F04%2F04%2Fis-mormonism-more-plausible-than-other-forms-of-christianity%2F&signup_flow=account)

Here’s my [interview with Tarik D. LaCour on
Mormonism](https://youtu.be/M3ShG06vJ2A), how it differs from other forms of
Christianity, and how Tarik’s views on scientism and empiricism factor into
his faith.

> “…if consciousness does not admit of borderline cases, then we will have to
> suppose that some utterly precise micro-level change—down to an exact
> arrangement of particles—marked the first appearance of consciousness (or
> the change from non-conscious to conscious embryo/foetus), and it is going
> to seem arbitrary that it was that utterly precise change that was
> responsible for this significant change in nature.”
>
> Panpsychism, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

If a borderline, indeterminate case of consciousness is impossible, our
trouble in determining where consciousness exists in nature – whether or not a
given system is conscious – comes down to our epistemic __ limitations. Our
limited epistemic access to other minds is the cause of any indeterminacy, not
the nature of consciousness itself.

This does not seem possible for experience, since there is always a fact of
the matter about whether an organism is a conscious being or an insentient
mechanism. Sensation is present in the earthworm or it isn’t, regardless of
what anyone believes about the earthworm, or what we’re able to discover about
it. Besides, what is “borderline case of experience” supposed to mean? A
proto-sensation that _kind of_ feels like something? If it’s “kind of like
something,” then it’s like something. The lights may be dim, but there is a
fact of the matter about whether it’s like _something_ or like _nothing_. Of
course, the contents of consciousness can be vague. We can be unsure of _what_
we’re feeling, or unsure of whether some particular experience falls into one
category or another, but it’s never vague whether experience is present in the
first place. Whether earthworms are conscious is uncertain, but there must be
a fact of the matter about whether it is like _nothing at all_ to be a worm or
_anything other than_ nothing at all.

The trouble of figuring out _where_ consciousness exists in nature – whether
or not a given system is conscious – could come down to our limited access to
other minds. Or perhaps the apparent indeterminacy is a reflection of the real
nature of minds – consciousness is actually vague. Either our epistemic
limitations produced by the privacy of consciousness result in indeterminacy,
or (inclusive or) consciousness is actually vague, which means that there is
genuine indeterminacy in addition to our epistemic limitations.

Not all physical things are vague: _Fundamental_ physical things are sharp.
What could it mean for the fundamental __ level of reality to be vague? If
something admits of borderline cases, that only seems to suggest that it’s
non-fundamental – that it’s composed of something _more_ fundamental. The
fundament must be sharp in a way that a higher-level physical phenomenon is
not. Isn’t it interesting that consciousness has this feature that seems to be
shared only by fundamental entities?

> “…is it consciousness itself that is indeterminate, or just our ability to
> decide about it? It isn’t easy to make sense of the idea that consciousness
> itself is vague. Either the light is on, we feel, or it isn’t. The glow of
> consciousness might be dim in some cases, but a dim light is still a
> definite light, not a borderline light-or-non-light. And on reflection it
> seems hard to imagine a genuinely borderline case of consciousness. This
> suggests that any indeterminacy about marginal cases of consciousness must
> lie in our limited epistemic access to the minds at issue, not in those
> minds themselves.”
>
> David Papineau (2022)

Surprisingly, Papineau goes on to reject the sharpness of consciousness,
despite admitting that he has trouble even imagining the alternative. He
maintains that the eventual appearance of consciousness must have been vague,
admitting of borderline cases. Given the earlier quotation, in which he seems
to understand why that can’t be so, his rejection sounds more than a little
odd. However, his primary motivation is that accepting non-vagueness would
rule out physicalism. The non-physicalist options present various difficulties
(only a couple of which he briefly raises before deeming them too hard to
solve). Even worse, the non-physicalist options are not physicalism(!), and
physicalism is undoubtedly true. He goes so far as to walk up to the line of
conceding that it’s impossible to conceive of a borderline state of
consciousness, and _yet he still asserts that they exist_. After all, if it
wasn’t so, physicalism would be wrong. Much like the trinity, the
inconceivable vagueness of consciousness is an awesome mystery.

The motivation for the first premise lies in the vagueness of non-fundamental
physical phenomena, especially in the biological world, which is where
consciousness is typically assumed to have arisen. Complex, non-fundamental
physical states admit of borderline cases. So, if consciousness is just a kind
of physical state, it follows that consciousness should also admit of
borderline cases. Even if we scale down, past the higher-level activity of the
brain, and zoom in to neuronal activity, vagueness is inescapable even at this
more fine-grained level of resolution:

Tagged [argument against
physicalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-against-
physicalism/),
[consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness/),
[consciousness
sharp](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness-sharp/),
[consciousness
vague](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness-vague/),
[dualism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/dualism/),
[goff](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/goff/),
[materialism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/materialism/),
[Michael tye](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/michael-tye/), [nino
kadic](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/nino-kadic/),
[panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/panpsychism/),
[Papineau](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/papineau/),
[philosophy](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/philosophy/),
[philosophy of mind](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/philosophy-of-
mind/),
[physicalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/physicalism/),
[sharp](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/sharp/),
[sharpness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/sharpness/),
[vague](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vague/), [vagueness and the
evolution of
consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-and-the-
evolution-of-consciousness/), [vagueness
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument/),
[vagueness argument against
physicalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument-
against-physicalism/), [vagueness argument for
panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument-
for-panpsychism/)

> “The vagueness argument suggests panpsychism as one of the options that can
> accommodate the strong intuition that consciousness is sharp and determinate
> because it ties consciousness to fundamental physical entities.”
>
> Nino Kadić (2022)

> “ _What_ I experience is initially indefinite and impoverished. As I become
> fully awake, _what_ I experience gets richer and richer. But this doesn’t
> show that experience or consciousness itself has borderline cases.”
>
> Michael Tye (2021)

If we remove one atom at a time from a given brain state, at some point, it
will be indeterminate whether or not the organism is still in that brain
state. Physical states of an organism’s brain and body admit of borderline
cases. If consciousness is physical, we would expect consciousness to follow
suit.

One complication here is memory. I often forget my dreams, and am entirely
unable to recall what I dreamt hours after waking, even though I could
remember for the first few minutes after waking up. Was I conscious the entire
time I was asleep, and just don’t remember it? I was certainly conscious for
some of it, since dream states are experiential states. Yet, I often forget
what I dreamt and _that_ I dreamt in the first place. Why couldn’t it be the
case that a dim glow of consciousness persists as long as I’m alive? Memory is
a fairly high-level feature of animal consciousness, and it’s easy to
conceptually separate experience and memory. It’s possible that there’s no
_experiential_ cutoff, sharp or vague, between sleep and wakefulness. This
would allow us to hold that the boundary between being asleep and being awake
is vague. _Other_ features of our minds come online and go offline, and the
contents of our minds change dramatically, but we can’t rule out the idea that
there’s a light that never goes out completely.

The vagueness argument is concerned with the fact that there’s no wiggle room
between experience and non-experience, between the presence and absence of
feeling. All the putative examples of borderline cases fall short, usually
obviously so. So after all this trying and failing to describe an
indeterminate state between experience and non-experience, are we justified in
taking it to be impossible? To quote Tye, “Conceivability is defeasible
evidence for metaphysical possibility and inconceivability is defeasible
evidence for metaphysical impossibility.” So, we have defeasible support for
the claim that a genuine borderline case of consciousness is metaphysically
impossible. If physicalism is true, borderline cases of consciousness are
possible. Since they appear to be impossible, it follows that physicalism is
false.

On the other hand, physical states admit borderline cases. If we remove one
atom at a time from a given brain state, it will eventually be vague or
indeterminate whether or not the organism is still in that brain state.
Physical states of a subject’s brain admit of borderline cases. So if
consciousness is just a kind of physical state, then we’d expect consciousness
to follow suit. But since it seems impossible that there could be a borderline
case of consciousness – it’s either like something for a creature or like
nothing at all – then we have reason to think that physicalism is false.

> “Neurons are complex physical entities with diverse components. Each neuron
> has a cell body, dendrites, and an axon. Electrical impulses come in along
> the dendrites and go out along the axon. Imagine removing atoms one by one
> from a given neuron. Eventually, as one does so, there will be no neuron
> left. But along the way, there will surely be a range of borderline
> cases—entities that are neither definitely neurons nor definitely not
> neurons. So, the property of being a neuronal oscillation is vague. It
> admits of borderline cases. In general, neurophysiological properties are
> highly complex. The idea that the relevant neural properties for
> consciousness are sharp is extremely implausible.”
>
> Michael Tye (2021)

What about pain? There are examples of negative states that don’t seem to
qualify as definitely painful. If you put your hand on a warm stove as it
gradually heats up, you’ll eventually start to feel pain, but when exactly? Is
there a precise moment when the stove goes from warm to hot, and when your
experience turns definitely painful? There is no precise threshold, and there
will be borderline cases where your experience doesn’t seem like it’s
definitely pain, but also not definitely _not_ pain. So, a borderline case of
experience? It is a borderline case of pain – a certain _type of_ experience.
But it’s not a borderline case between consciousness and unconsciousness,
which is what the vagueness argument is concerned with. There are many cases
in which it’s indeterminate _what_ a subject is feeling, but not _whether_
they’re feeling.

What do I mean by consciousness? Roughly, I’ll be following how Michael Tye
uses the term in his book, _Vagueness and the Evolution of Consciousness_ :
“Consciousness, for present purposes, is experience. Experiences are mental
states such that there is inherently something it is like subjectively to
undergo them. Examples are feeling pain, feeling an itch, visualizing an
elephant, experiencing anger, and feeling fearful.” I’ll be using a few terms
interchangeably – subjective experience, phenomenal consciousness, “what-
it’s-like-ness,” sentience, sensation. For our purposes in this episode, when
I say “consciousness,” I mean the qualitative, phenomenal character of
consciousness: the thing that makes the hard problem hard; the thing without
which it wouldn’t count as a subjective experience at all.

> “We now have an argument for anti-physicalism that is independent of the
> discussion on Nagel, Jackson, and Chalmers, that relies on the very
> intuitive notion that the concept of ‘conscious state’ is sharp, and which
> suggests that one possible upshot is a theory that binds consciousness to
> fundamental physics, such as panpsychism.”
>
> Nino Kadić (2022)

There are other examples offered by critics of the argument which also miss
the point, mostly having to do with whether an experience falls into this or
that category, but the intuition of sharpness seems to be fairly common
amongst physicalists and non-physicalists alike. Many of us also have an
apparently conflicting intuition that consciousness comes in degrees, but this
isn’t a threat to the vagueness argument properly understood. Just as I have
no issue describing sleep as “unconsciousness” – since “consciousness” denotes
more than just experience – there’s no problem with claiming that
consciousness comes in degrees. Consciousness _can_ come in degrees in nearly
every sense of how people use the term consciousness, save for one – the one
that tends to interest me. It’s obvious that in some sense, I’m “more
conscious” than my cats. I’m _conscious of_ more things than they are, and
enjoy a richer inner life than they do (e.g., complex language is a feature of
my inner life but not theirs). I’m also conscious to a greater degree after
I’ve had coffee than just after I’ve woken up, even though both states were
like something for me. I think it’s easy to parse out what we’re getting at
when we say things like “He stumbled around the room, half-conscious” or
“Humans are conscious to a higher degree than non-human animals,” and so on.
The widespread intuitions underlying these statements don’t conflict with the
vagueness argument. There’s no issue with “degrees” of consciousness in
practically every sense of the term, even though experience itself is binary.

Vagueness arguments seem more supportive of panpsychism than dualism, since
panpsychism more easily accommodates our intuitions about vagueness. If
experience is sharp, why not just identify like with like?

However, as the second premise of the argument claims, this does not seem
possible for consciousness. No matter how minimal a conscious experience is,
it seems impossible to characterize any case in which it is merely “kind of”
like something to be in that state. We cannot describe any borderline case of
consciousness. It may be vague whether something is a particular type of
experience – maybe it’s unclear whether it’s this or that shade of green – but
it is never vague whether something is an experience to begin with. Yes,
aspects of our conscious lives come in degrees – degrees of intensity,
richness, complexity – but the presence of experience itself is another
matter. It’s binary; there’s no conceptual room between “like nothing” and
“like something.” The contents of experience can be vague, fuzzy, and
indeterminate, but there’s a sharp line separating the presence and absence of
experience.

> “…imagine that you are in a hospital bed feeling pain and that you can
> adjust a dial that controls the delivery of morphine to your body. As you do
> so, your pain becomes less intense, gradually transforming itself into a
> feeling of pleasure. In the middle of this process, there may well be
> experiences that are not easy to classify. Again, there is indeterminacy at
> such times as to what you are feeling, but there is no indeterminacy as to
> whether feeling continues to be present.” (2021)

Though I’ve been arguing that consciousness is sharp, I don’t think there was
any exact moment when this threshold was actually met. I’m not arguing that a
sharp line was crossed at some mysterious point in evolutionary history. Any
candidate would seem arbitrary. The world is a strange place, but presumably
we’d want some kind of reason that the sharp line was drawn _there_ and not
over there (e.g., at nervous systems with n neurons instead of n+1 neurons).
Any explanation of consciousness that terminates in brute arbitrariness is not
going to seem awfully compelling.

This is puzzlingly common. The materialist critics of vagueness arguments tend
to reject the sharpness of phenomenal consciousness, despite the fact that
some of them concede that they cannot describe or imagine a genuine borderline
case of consciousness.

This is why I mentioned coming out of sleep and general anesthesia first. It’s
not unreasonable to think that there is a moment coming out of general
anesthesia that the light turns back on, which then broadens in scope and
increases in its intensity. Those who would appeal to such examples as cases
of borderline consciousness should know that their way of reading that case is
not the only way. (Not to mention, their way has the unique disadvantage of
invoking something that seems impossible to conceive of.) When we cross from
sleep to wakefulness, one might hold that there _is_ an exact moment we wake
up, with the indistinct contents of consciousness gradually becoming less
fuzzy and indeterminate.

> “True, there are ‘half-conscious’ experiences, such as the first moments of
> waking. … But, on reflection, even these special experiences seem to qualify
> unequivocally as conscious, in the sense that they are like something,
> rather than nothing”
>
> David Papineau (1993)

Describing a genuine borderline case of experience feels a bit like trying to
describe a borderline case of “something-ness.” What is the borderline state
between something and nothing? How could there only _kind of_ be something
without it counting as something (i.e., not nothing)? We can rule out the
possibility of borderline cases of experience on the basis of their
inconceivability.

One reason it’s difficult to conclusively settle the question over where
consciousness exists in nature lies in the fact that phenomenal consciousness
– subjective experience – is publicly unobservable. Physical behavior, on the
other hand, _is_ publicly observable. The physical, material aspect of the
brain and body is accessible through our senses and scientific instruments,
while our inner lives remain elusively private. We can observe avoidance
behavior in worms, electrochemical activity in humans, and (crucially, for
neuroscience) verbal reports like “That hurts!” or “I’m seeing an orange cat
right now.” But your pain experience and orange experience is directly known
by you and you alone. (Earlier, I said _most_ people believe cats and dogs are
conscious. The reason it’s possible for some people to defend the idiotic
Cartesian notion that it’s like nothing to be a cat or dog – that they’re not
experiencing anything – is because experiences are private.) Here, whether or
not the privacy of experience counts against physicalism is not the point. The
public unobservability of consciousness pretty obviously makes it difficult to
determine _where_ consciousness exists in nature, which in turn multiplies the
difficulty of testing theories of consciousness.

When does the day become the night? Well, there is no _exact_ moment. When
does stubble become a beard? When does someone become famous? There is no fact
of the matter; there is no precise threshold. Take tables and chairs: we could
gradually deform a table until it is vague whether or not the object counts as
a table. So, tables admit borderline cases. At some point in our gradual
deformation, it will be vague or indeterminate or simply a matter of
convention whether _this_ object is still a table.

At first glance, the border between conscious organisms and non-conscious
organisms seems vague and fuzzy. There’s no obvious way of resolving the
question of which creatures are or are not conscious. Most people agree that
cats and dogs have mental states – they experience things – and so are
conscious. But fewer will agree that it’s like anything to be a fish (even
though they have a nervous system and eyes, and I’m not sure what they’d be
doing with them other than _seeing_ things). Fewer still would entertain the
idea that earthworms have any inner life. But who’s to say it isn’t _like
something_ for the worm who squirms from the wet grass over to the sidewalk?
Maybe they’re driven to behave in this way by negative experiences. After all,
worms possess a (very rudimentary) nervous system and seem to be exhibiting
purposeful behavior.

On reflection it seems hard to imagine anything other than a bright borderline
between wholly non-experiential reality and experiential reality. Experiences
are mental states such that there’s something it is like subjectively to
undergo them. It might be indeterminate _what_ you’re feeling, but not
_whether_ you’re feeling. The transition from feeling nothing to feeling
something couldn’t have been gradual: As soon as it’s not nothing, it’s
something. No matter how minimal a conscious experience is, if it’s “like
something” to exist – anything at all – it’s no longer like nothing at all.
There is no space between these two poles for indeterminacy to live. (We’ll
take a closer look at putative cases of borderline consciousness, e.g. states
between sleep and wakefulness, experiences that fall indeterminately between
pain and not-pain, and so on. None of these are genuine borderline cases of
consciousness in the relevant sense, and we’ll unpack them more later on.)
There’s always a fact of the matter about whether it’s like something for a
creature or like nothing at all. In other words, phenomenal consciousness is
sharp.

Alternatively, maybe sleep is not a state in which one experiences nothing at
all – maybe the backdrop of consciousness is always present. It’s possible
that the boundary between sleep and wakefulness is vague _because_ experience
never disappears entirely. Many of the features of human consciousness go
offline during sleep. So, there could be borderline states between being
asleep and being awake, but it would be a matter of fading certain features of
consciousness, not a total cessation of consciousness itself.

Let’s take a look at a few of the commonly-proposed examples of borderline
cases of consciousness. (Most of these are discussed in Michael Tye’s book,
_Vagueness and the Evolution of Consciousness_.) Say you’re waking up from a
deep sleep. In that very first moment of wakefulness, you’ll be groggy and
half-conscious. Isn’t this a borderline case of consciousness?

> 1\. If physicalism is true, borderline cases of consciousness are possible.
>
> 2\. Borderline cases of consciousness are not possible.
>
> 3\. Therefore, physicalism is false.

I would say the same holds for coming out of general anesthesia, as well as
other supposed borderline states between sleep and wakefulness. Imagine a
patient coming out of a coma. It doesn’t seem unreasonable to think that there
is a definite moment when the lights turn back on, which then broaden in scope
and increase in intensity. If that’s the case, though, consciousness is sharp.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F12%2F16%2Fthe-vagueness-argument-against-physicalism%2F&signup_flow=account)

> “Suggestions for the physical grounds of consciousness include global
> workspace activity, neural oscillation frequencies, re-entrant neural loops
> … action-guiding mental representation, and so on. _If any theory along
> these lines is correct, however, there will inevitably be borderline cases
> of consciousness itself. (Emphasis added)_ Global activities and the like
> come in degrees, and so any sharp cut-off point specifying exactly when we
> have enough for consciousness would be arbitrary. The obvious implication is
> that some mental states are indeterminate between being conscious and not.”
>
> David Papineau (2022)

When did consciousness first evolve? Was there a very first creature who broke
the pattern of insentience, feeling sensations and seeing light for the first
time in evolutionary history? Or did our capacity to experience the world
evolve gradually, like everything else? Phenomenal consciousness shouldn’t be
unique. We’d expect it to have evolved gradually, just as brains, eyes, and
cognitive abilities evolved gradually. Everything in biological evolution came
about little by little over time, so it’s unsurprising that the cumulative
products of natural selection admit of borderline cases. Even human beings are
subject to this vagueness: There was no first human, no sharp dividing line in
the continuum between “definitely human” and “definitely not a human.” But how
could this be the case with experiences, feelings, and sensations? I can see
how it’d be the case with particular types of experiences, but how could it be
the case with experience itself?

Here’s another way of putting the argument. Physicalists often talk about
“emergence” in a weak sense: Biology emerges from chemistry; chemistry emerges
from physics; and so on. There’s a smooth continuum from fundamental physical
reality to the biological realm. And just as H2O molecules emerge from the
right combination of atoms, so experience emerges from brain activity. The
problem is that the products of weak emergence – complex physical states in
the biological realm – admit borderline cases. States of an organism’s brain
and body are vague. So if experience is just a complex physical state, it
should be similarly vague. But by virtue of being conscious creatures, we can
reflect and see that experience is sharp. What we’d expect to see if
physicalism is true is _not_ a sharp phenomenon emerging at the biological
level. In short, the products of weak emergence in the biological realm admit
of borderline cases. Since experience doesn’t, it’s hard to see how it could
be the product of weak emergence.

> “In seeking physical properties whose concepts are sharp, the obvious place
> to look is fundamental physics.”
>
> Michael Anthony (2006)

If consciousness is sharp, and fundamental reality can’t be vague, then we
seem to have some support for the notion that we should place consciousness at
fundamental reality, rather than try to defend the unintelligible idea that
consciousness can be vague. Superficially, we have a conflicting intuition
that consciousness comes in degrees, but as discussed earlier, this isn’t a
threat to the vagueness argument properly understood. Further, panpsychism
easily accommodates both intuitions: It allows us to coherently hold that
consciousness is sharp (since it ties consciousness to fundamental physical
entities), _and_ that consciousness comes in degrees (since pre-existing
conscious material changes in complexity and richness as it evolves). The
vagueness argument is primarily an argument against physicalism. It may point
suggestively towards panpsychism, but that’s an added bonus.

Of course, it can be indeterminate _what_ a subject is feeling, but not
_whether_ they’re feeling. The existence of experience itself is what’s
relevant to the vagueness argument. There doesn’t appear to be any wiggle room
between the existence and non-existence of experience, between the presence
and absence of feeling. What exactly is “borderline case of consciousness”
supposed to mean? A proto-sensation that _kind of_ feels like something? If
it’s “kind of like something,” then it’s like something.

Here is an abridged version of [my post on the vagueness argument against
physicalism.](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/2022/12/16/the-vagueness-
argument-against-physicalism/)

Tagged [consciousness
sharp](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness-sharp/),
[consciousness
vague](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness-vague/),
[evolution of
consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolution-of-
consciousness/), [Michael
tye](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/michael-tye/),
[panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/panpsychism/),
[vagueness and the evolution of
consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-and-the-
evolution-of-consciousness/), [vagueness
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument/),
[vagueness argument against
physicalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument-
against-physicalism/), [vagueness argument for
panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument-
for-panpsychism/)

What is meant by “consciousness”? I’ll be following how Michael Tye uses the
term in his book, _Vagueness and the Evolution of Consciousness_ :

> “Conceivability is defeasible evidence for metaphysical possibility and
> inconceivability is defeasible evidence for metaphysical impossibility.”
>
> Michael Tye (2021)

Try to imagine the dawn of consciousness in evolutionary history. The
cumulative products of biological evolution (e.g. eyes and brains) came about
gradually, little by little over time. But it seems that the transition from
feeling nothing to feeling something couldn’t have been similarly gradual: As
soon as it’s not nothing, it’s something. There is no space between these two
poles for indeterminacy to get a foothold. No matter how minimal a conscious
experience is, if it’s “like something” to exist – anything at all – it’s not
like nothing at all.

The products of weak emergence in the biological realm admit of borderline
cases. Since experience doesn’t, it’s hard to see how it could be the product
of weak emergence.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F01%2F01%2Fthe-vagueness-argument%2F&signup_flow=account)

The problem is that the products of weak emergence – complex physical states
in the biological realm – admit of borderline cases. States of an organism’s
brain and body are vague. So if experience is just a complex physical state,
it should be similarly vague. But by virtue of being conscious creatures, we
can reflect and see that experience is sharp. What we’d expect to see if
physicalism is true is _not_ a sharp phenomenon emerging at the biological
level.

I tend to think a more precise definition of consciousness would make the edge
cases easier to identify. Of course, there are many possible definitions. I
think that fact shows where the real vagueness lies, in the concept of
consciousness itself.

I think where it starts to become problematic for me is the definition of
consciousness, Nagel’s “something it is like”, which itself seems vague. It
doesn’t really provide anything with which we can use to scrutinize the claim
that consciousness is sharp, since it’s not clear what exactly it is that’s
sharp. The examples (pain, itch, anger, fear) don’t seem to help because they
also appear to be examples of things later noted can be indeterminate.

The motivation for the first premise lies in the
[vagueness](https://1000wordphilosophy.com/2019/03/11/vagueness/) of physical
phenomena, especially in the biological world, which is where consciousness is
typically assumed to have arisen. If we remove one atom at a time from brain
state B, it will eventually be vague or indeterminate whether the organism is
still in B. Complex, non-fundamental physical states admit of borderline
cases. So, if consciousness is just a kind of complex physical state, we’d
expect consciousness to follow suit. If it seems impossible that there could
be a borderline case of consciousness, then we would have reason to think
physicalism is false.

> “Consciousness, for present purposes, is experience. Experiences are mental
> states such that there is inherently something it is like subjectively to
> undergo them. Examples are feeling pain, feeling an itch, visualizing an
> elephant, experiencing anger, and feeling fearful.” (2021)

Here’s another way of putting the argument. Physicalists sometimes talk about
“emergence” in a weak sense: Biology emerges from chemistry; chemistry emerges
from physics; and so on. There’s allegedly a smooth continuum from fundamental
physical reality to the biological realm. And just as H2O molecules emerge
from the right combination of atoms, so experience emerges from brain
activity.

Describing a genuine borderline case of experience feels a bit like trying to
describe a borderline case of “something-ness.” What is the borderline state
between something and nothing? How could there only _kind of_ be something
without counting it as something (i.e., not nothing)? Whether simple creatures
like earthworms are conscious is uncertain, but there must be a fact of the
matter about whether it is like _nothing at all_ to be a worm or _anything
other than_ nothing at all. We cannot describe any borderline case of
consciousness. Since inconceivability is defeasible evidence for metaphysical
impossibility, we have defeasible support for the claim that a genuine
borderline case of consciousness is metaphysically impossible.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F12%2F24%2Fmeager-moral-fruits%2F&signup_flow=account)

I wanted to say that one hesitation (possibly the only hesitation) I feel in
presenting this argument is that I’m not giving the religious believers in my
life who have been a positive moral witness their due. I sometimes feel a
tinge of guilt when I defend this argument, since I can be misunderstood as
saying that there are no Christians who I respect or look up to as sources of
moral wisdom. That is not at all true. So I have two things to say on this,
one negative and one positive. The negative is that this concern, framed as an
objection to the argument, is not any good. It should be obvious that claims
made about Christianity as a whole don’t reflect on every single individual
Christian, just as claims about the United States don’t reflect on every
individual U.S. citizen. One could say something true about the United States,
yet it would be trivially easy to find ten people who seemed to
straightforwardly disconfirm whatever claim was made. On a strictly
argumentative level, this is totally insignificant. But on an interpersonal
level, it’s highly significant. There are Christians in my life who are wise,
intelligent, moral people. Some have been a positive witness in my life, even
though I don’t agree with them about every minute ethical issue. (Though some
of them I do agree with very often.) In fact, if more Christians were like
them, I would never have offered this argument to begin with. The last thing I
want to do is give the impression that I have anything other than love and
respect for these religious believers in my life, or imply that their
influence hasn’t been positive. I’m overwhelmingly grateful to have them in my
life. I can honestly say that if more Christians were like them, the odds that
I would be a Christian would increase dramatically.

Ben Watkins of Real Atheology joined me to discuss the meager moral fruits
argument, a few objections to the argument, and why we’re interested in it in
the first place.

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [draper](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/draper/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/), [inspiring
philosophy](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/inspiring-philosophy/),
[meager moral fruit](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-
fruit/), [meager moral
fruits](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruits/),
[meager moral fruits
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruits-
argument/), [philosophy of
religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/philosophy-of-religion/),
[real atheology](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/real-atheology/),
[Religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religion/),
[theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/theism/), [tippling
philosopher](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/tippling-philosopher/)

> “The vast majority of law enforcement professionals surveyed agree that
> capital punishment does not deter violent crime; a survey of police chiefs
> nationwide found they rank the death penalty lowest among ways to reduce
> violent crime. They ranked increasing the number of police officers,
> reducing drug abuse, and creating a better economy with more jobs higher
> than the death penalty as the best ways to reduce violence. The FBI has
> found the states with the death penalty have the highest murder rates.”
>
> _The Case Against the Death Penalty, The American Civil Liberties Union_

Benjamin Yost defends “the principle of remedy” in his treatise against the
death penalty. This is, according to Yost, a fundamental tenet of liberal
political morality. We _know_ the state will make mistakes, and an institution
sensitive to justice must be prepared to remedy its mistakes. Execution,
however, is irreversible. It _can’t_ be remedied, and consequently falls short
of this ideal. There’s a finality to death that renders it disanalogous to
imprisonment. If a prisoner is discovered to be innocent, as thousands have
been in the wake of forensic advancements – not to mention moral progress in
eliminating unjust or nonsensical laws – they can be freed and paid damages.
Those who have been wrongly killed, however, cannot be resurrected.

Their dignity? If this was the only reason to oppose the death penalty, I
would unequivocally support it. I think some people do not deserve to live –
we would certainly not be doing wrong by a sadistic murderer in killing them.
All this to say that I’m the ideal audience for advocates of the death
penalty! Their typical arguments don’t sway me because _none of that_ is
sufficient to legitimize state-sanctioned capital punishment or overcome the
considerations I’ve raised. Maybe some of those considerations have been
slightly unorthodox, but even some of the more common arguments against
capital punishment can withstand the predictable barrage of death penalty
apologetics:

Earlier, we talked about why merely justifying the idea that some people
deserve to die is insufficient to justify the death penalty system. Likewise,
defending the permissibility of revenge when terrible wrongs have been
committed is insufficient to justify the death penalty system.

We can make progress: we no longer kill 13-year-olds for stealing spoons. Yet,
I doubt anyone would defend the idea that we have a perfect justice system, or
that we’ll ever have a perfect justice system. Outside of thought experiment
land, it’ll always be imperfect, even if we stipulate to the people handing
out these irreversible punishments, “Oh, by the way, you have to be certain.”
Once again, how is this requirement of assurance any different from “Beyond a
reasonable doubt,” which is the standard now and was the standard at the time
of every death penalty horror story in recent memory? The evidential standard
for receiving the death penalty was never “Eh, flip a coin” or “Check your
crystal ball.” Every innocent who’s been convicted and put to death died at
the hands of people who thought they couldn’t be wrong.

> “…opposition to the death penalty wasn’t the real problem with Dukakis’s
> response. Rather, it was the clinical nature of his answer to such a
> personal question. Like Jacob, Dukakis showed no depth of feeling, no anger,
> no fierce loyalty to a close family member. Kitty has been raped and killed,
> and Dukakis is worried about whether the death penalty is a deterrent? This
> is no time for a cost-benefit analysis.” (pp.149-150)

What if we reserved capital punishment for those whose guilt was certain? The
problem with this is that it ignores the _current_ standard, which is already
supposedly high enough to preclude any reasonable doubt. (What do those who
deploy this apologetic think the standard is now? 70% confidence?) Despite
this nominally high bar of “beyond a reasonable doubt,” many innocents have
been wrongfully convicted and put to death. In most (if not all) of those
cases, there _was_ room for reasonable doubt. But this high-minded standard
was imperfectly applied, which is exactly what would happen – has happened –
with any standard of certainty or near-certainty of guilt. Besides, any
specific example of a crime in which we’re certain of the perpetrator’s
culpability is going to be contentious. In the past, many judges, juries,
members of the press and public have felt that the evidence was only possible
to interpret in one way, only to discover that they had been mistaken.

Some might worry this proves too much. If we’re so concerned with the
imperfect determination of guilt, and by extension, the administration of
punishment, then shouldn’t we abolish prisons? After all, some innocents are
imprisoned. Some laws are morally arbitrary, and even just laws are
arbitrarily enforced.

Proponents of capital punishment too often burn their energy zealously
defending claims that I would not dispute. They’ll recount grisly stories,
highlighting some of the darkest chapters of human existence, then throw up
their hands as if it’s just plain obvious that this person deserves to die.
But this is not where the conflict lies.

It’s not about having the punishment _undone_ , which is impossible. The
wrongfully imprisoned can’t get those years of their life back. The asymmetry
between imprisonment and the death penalty lies in our inability to _bring the
punishment to an end_ and to try to make things right for the wrongfully
convicted. While those who have been imprisoned can be freed and paid damages,
those who have been killed cannot have their punishment brought to an end or
remedied. And though you might think that the _families_ of the wrongfully
killed could receive damages, that’s not equivalent to compensating the one
who was wrongfully convicted. There’s no chance of remedy _for them_ , because
the enthusiasts for the death penalty had them killed.

Since the application of the death penalty will inevitably be morally
arbitrary in some cases – either due to the morally arbitrary nature of the
laws themselves, the enforcement of the law, or the imperfect determination of
guilt – we cannot have the death penalty without murdering innocents. Since
saving innocent life is far more important than ending the lives of the
guilty, this should dissuade us from maintaining a death-penalty system.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F12%2F07%2Fwhy-i-support-abolition-of-the-death-penalty%2F&signup_flow=account)

Imagine someone you love on trial for something they did not do. They’re
wrongfully convicted in a slow, clinical legal process; and after a lengthy
time in prison, they’re killed by lethal injection. I can scarcely imagine the
horror of finding oneself in this position of knowing that someone you love
will be taken from you by a mob acting with the pretense of civility and
honor. It is something I wish on no one, and I hope that those responsible for
putting innocent people to death will someday come to their senses and stop
perpetuating this madness.

While the first statement is at least defensible, the latter is a joke.
There’s an obvious asymmetry here, because saving innocent people is more
important than killing guilty people. The staunchest defender of capital
punishment wouldn’t appeal to a few worthy recipients if they were the
_exception_. Unless the vast majority are guilty, even they would lose their
stomach for supporting the policy in practice. So, we already agree that
preserving innocent life is _far_ more important than justifiably killing the
few who deserve it. Yet, they have a much higher tolerance for killing
innocent people than we do.

Arguing that some people deserve to die is not sufficient to show that any
particular organization should have the power and legitimacy to carry out
executions.

What people like Marquis don’t seem to realize is that this is _inevitable_.
(If they do understand this, then it follows that they’re consciously
defending a _pro tanto_ morally arbitrary system of ending human lives.) Even
if we eliminate the _current_ sources of arbitrariness in our justice system,
new ones will surely replace them. Any cursory glance at the history of
capital punishment should assure us of this. Whether it’s the laws themselves,
the application and enforcement of the laws, or the determination of guilt,
there will be unjust killings.

The protection of innocent people is at the center of my anti-death penalty
position. One reason it seems so obvious to me that protecting innocent lives
is _far_ more important than doling out capital punishment is the contrast
between these two moral statements:

Even the defenders of capital punishment could be swayed by altering the ratio
of guilty:innocent executions. They’ll make it known that they’re willing to
have an innocent person killed here and there if it means stacking up a pile
of others who deserve it. Maybe they’re comfortable with one in a thousand, or
one in a hundred, but one in ten? Thirty percent? Forty percent? When does
saving the innocent countervail the punishment of the guilty? What if we had
to kill ninety-nine innocent people in order to kill one person who deserved
it? I think any morally normal person would agree that that would be
unacceptable. So how many innocent people are you, the defender of the death
penalty, comfortable with killing? How much blood on your hands is too much?

> “The death penalty system in the US is applied in an unfair and unjust
> manner against people, largely dependent on how much money they have, the
> skill of their attorneys, race of the victim and where the crime took
> place.”
>
> _The Case Against the Death Penalty, The American Civil Liberties Union_

The abolition of the death penalty, say its apologists, would involve a
genuine moral cost: Those who deserve execution will walk free. But granting
that this is a genuine evasion of justice doesn’t mean it’s the _only_
consideration we need to factor in. So, John Wayne Gacy is killed by lethal
injection instead of dying in prison. Great. But is that worth George Stinney?
The moral side of my case rests on the idea that saving innocent lives is far
more important than ending those of the guilty. Killing those who deserve to
die is just not as important as saving those who do not deserve to die.

Hey, here’s your chance! Here’s your chance to be the unstoppable badass you
imagine yourself to be! So many advocates of capital punishment are this man,
with a gulf between their self-image and what they actually are. Many of us
know guys like this, with body armor and guns, playing dress-up. For them,
it’s a costume party for adults. Most if not all of these people advocate the
death penalty (because they’re so incredibly badass). No, they’re not soft!
That’s why they support _the death penalty_. That’s why they want…someone else
to do the thing that they don’t have the courage, loyalty, and strength to do
themselves. Some don’t possess these qualities, and seem to think that
advocating capital punishment proves that they don’t lack them. The sickly
reality of the death penalty, however, is far removed from what these people
seem to have in mind. They pretend to have those qualities of courage,
loyalty, and strength, completely unearned, while a faceless employee of the
state carries out sanitized, impersonal “revenge” that’s been stripped of
every virtue.

Capital punishment is not reconcilable with the principle of remedy. When
mistakes are inevitably made, the punishment for the wrongly convicted cannot
be brought to an end and they cannot be given damages.

If one were to bet on my position on the death penalty based on some of my
other views, they’d probably guess wrong. I believe in free will; I think
human beings are responsible for their actions; and I’m not opposed to
retribution in all cases; I think there are virtuous qualities to revenge; and
I think some people deserve to die. Further, the more common arguments against
the death penalty, to me, have little to no import:

In his book _[Why Honor Matters](https://www.amazon.com/Why-Honor-Matters-
Tamler-Sommers/dp/0465098878)_ , Tamler Sommers writes that while vengeance is
“hard to contain, hard to get right”, it’s certainly not always immoral.
(Interestingly, the emotions behind the desire for revenge are absent only in
those who we’d likely regard with suspicion and disgust.) In book 34 of
Genesis, a young woman named Dinah is kidnapped by a powerful man and raped.
While her two brothers are grieved and angry, their father, Jacob, seems to be
neither, and is primarily concerned with avoiding violent conflict and how he
might profit from being paid damages by his daughter’s rapist. At great
personal risk, the two brothers disobey their father and kill their sister’s
tormentor. (And a lot of other people. It’s the Old Testament.) As Sommers
explains,

One version of this objection is a moral claim about just deserts. The other
is an empirical claim about the deterrent effects of capital punishment.
First, let’s deal with the easier of the two: the death penalty is not an
effective deterrent. It has no public safety benefit.

First, in no way does it follow from “Some people deserve the death penalty”
that “ _This_ organization should be permitted to determine guilt and carry
out executions.” There’s a chasm between the judgment that some people
plausibly do not deserve to live and the judgment that a given body should
have the legitimacy to determine guilt and kill people based on its
assessments. Imagine I gave an impassioned defense of the death penalty, and
concluded by saying that the power to perform executions should be in the
hands of the Lincoln Elementary School PTA. The parent-teacher association
from an elementary school in southwest Michigan should be the arbiters of
guilt and death. After all, capital punishment is justified! Necessary, even!

Do some people deserve to die? Should there be a death penalty? Contrary to
what some proponents of capital punishment believe, these are not two ways of
asking the same question.

This particular section will not resonate with everybody. I’m going to assume
that revenge is not immoral across the board, and some on both sides will take
issue with that assumption. But for those who don’t think revenge is always
impermissible or ill-advised, you might be able to appreciate another reason
why the death penalty strikes some of us as so odious.

[Against Capital Punishment by Benjamin Yost, Reviewed by Jeffrey Howard –
Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews](https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/against-capital-
punishment/)

These practical concerns do not cut to the heart of the matter, but it is a
fact that no man-made guilt-determining structure will be without flaws – it
will determine guilt imperfectly. (“Imperfectly” is a hell of a euphemism
here.) So how comfortable are you with having innocent people killed, like
[George Stinney](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Stinney)? Once again, it
is an unavoidable fact that a defense of the death penalty in practice means
defending the murder of innocent people at the hands of the state. The murder
of [14-year-old George Stinney](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-
mix/wp/2014/12/18/the-rush-job-conviction-of-14-year-old-george-stinney-
exonerated-70-years-after-execution/) could have been avoided. Unfortunately,
he will not be the last victim of death penalty apologists.

_“Oh, you say you value innocent life, up there on your high horse, yet you’ve
forgotten about the real victims. It’s not the people sitting on death row.
Many of those people_ are _guilty, and they_ did _commit heinous crimes. What
about their victims? Or are you only concerned with the people on death row?”_

The opponents of capital punishment seem to be more clear-eyed about the
imperfect and morally arbitrary nature of the state’s process of determining
guilt.

Dukakis replied, “No, I don’t, Bernard, and I think you know that I’ve opposed
the death penalty during all of my life. I don’t see any evidence that it’s a
deterrent, and I think there are better and more effective ways to deal with
violent crime. We’ve done so in my own state, and it’s one of the reasons why
we have had the biggest drop in crime of any industrial state in America, why
we have the lowest murder rate of any industrial state in America.” After the
election, the conventional wisdom held that any presidential candidate opposed
to the death penalty was unelectable. But, as Sommers argues,

The application of capital punishment is often morally arbitrary. It’s not as
if the death penalty is exclusively reserved for the worst of the worst. Even
setting aside the innocents who have been on death row, those who are _guilty_
are often undeserving as well! In fact, advocates of capital punishment will
acknowledge that the death penalty system is often applied in a morally
arbitrary manner. Joshua Marquis, for instance, believes that _many_ of those
on death row do not deserve the death penalty. To be clear, he thinks that
these people are guilty – they just don’t deserve to die for what they did.
Even when guilt is determined correctly, that’s no guarantee that the death
penalty will be a proportionate punishment, since capital punishment, in
practice, is applied in a morally arbitrary manner.

Even granting that one might deserve to die, that doesn’t mean that every way
of going about it is just as good as any other way. Some stories of revenge
killings, fictional and non-fictional, possess virtues such that many (if not
most) people can’t help but feel at least a tinge of admiration. But what’s
honorable about impersonal capital punishment from a third-party who didn’t
know the victims? Death by lethal injection years after the crime at the hands
of a faceless employee is a far cry from the invigorating stories of revenge.
Where’s the bravery? Or courage, or risk-taking, or strength, or loyalty?
_None_ of that is present. The reality of the death penalty isn’t that it’s
excessively cruel, but that it’s a cowardly, sanitized, impersonal,
embarrassing husk of what its proponents undeservedly claim to embody.

The other version of this objection is a moral claim about justice: “We’re
doing right by the victims in our execution of the criminal.” And as I’ve been
trying to say, I don’t really dispute this. Some people deserve to die. I do,
however, think that taking an innocent life is a major countervailing
consideration. In fact, it’s often the offense that landed the criminal in
this position to begin with! If we were really horrified by the perversity of
killing an innocent person – extinguishing the life of one who truly does not
deserve it – then shouldn’t we be horrified at the prospect of doing it
ourselves?

Even when everything goes as it’s designed – when a person guilty of a heinous
crime is sentenced to death – the virtues of revenge are absent. Advocates of
capital punishment seem to have something quite lofty in their minds, but
their self-image is delusionally inaccurate. The clinical and cowardly way in
which life is being taken is enough to drain any remaining respect I might’ve
had for the death penalty system.

> “…honorable avengers demonstrate virtues like bravery, loyalty, and
> integrity. They take risks and accept responsibility for their actions. The
> three Israeli settlers showed none of these characteristics. They were
> cowards, looking for a physically slight victim to make the abduction easier
> and less risky. They had no personal ties to the Israeli victims … The
> killers did not accept responsibility; they tried to burn all evidence of
> their behavior. One of them pleaded insanity at the trial.” (p.146)

Tagged [abolish the death
penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/abolish-the-death-
penalty/), [aclu](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aclu/), [against
capital punishment](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/against-
capital-punishment/), [against the death
penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/against-the-death-
penalty/), [amnesty
international](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/amnesty-
international/),
[arguments](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments/), [arguments
against capital
punishment](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments-against-
capital-punishment/), [arguments against the death
penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments-against-the-
death-penalty/), [Benjamin
yost](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/benjamin-yost/), [capital
punishment](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/capital-punishment/),
[death penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/death-penalty/),
[debate](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debate/), [George
stinney](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/george-stinney/), [Joshua
marquis](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/joshua-marquis/), [oppose
the death penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/oppose-the-
death-penalty/),
[prageru](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/prageru/), [tamler
sommers](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/tamler-sommers/)

Of course, no one in their right mind would offer unconditional support for
any and all tales of vengeance: “…honorable avengers demonstrate virtues like
bravery, loyalty, and integrity. They take risks and accept responsibility for
their actions.” (p.146)

Why he checked his phone while children were being gunned down, screaming, I
don’t know. But the _Punisher_ wallpaper ensured that this image would be
forever branded on my brain. For those who are unaware, _The Punisher_ is a TV
show about a vigilante:  
  
_“After exacting revenge on the people responsible for the deaths of his wife
and children, Frank Castle uncovers a conspiracy that runs deeper than New
York’s criminal underworld. Now known as the Punisher, he must dig deep into
the conspiracy to discover the truth about injustices that affect more than
just him and his family.”_

> “If a liberal state must abstain from unjust coercion, it must also endeavor
> to alleviate all those illicit burdens it does impose … To fail to try to
> put things aright evinces a callousness to injustice that, if not equivalent
> in countenancing the original wrongful act, stands in close proximity.”
>
> _Benjamin Yost, Against Capital Punishment_

> “The brothers’ virtue lies not just in the act of revenge – which is
> gruesome and arguably disproportionate – but also in the anger that causes
> it. By adopting a prudent ‘what’s done is done, and let’s make the best of
> it’ approach, Jacob shows nothing but a concern for his safety and profit.
> The two brothers, by contrast, are too outraged over the treatment of their
> sister to engage in a cost-benefit analysis. Their anger leads to a
> decidedly imprudent act of revenge, and it’s the imprudence that
> demonstrates loyalty to their sister.” (pp.148-149)

Opponents of the death penalty disparagingly use the phrase “legalized
revenge,” a concept which does strike me as repellant, but not for the same
reason as most who use the term: For me, it’s the “legalized” part, not the
“revenge” part. Our legal system is intended to be impartial and impersonal.
When offenders commit crimes, the conflict is between the offender and the
state. But revenge is personal by nature. Make no mistake, the death penalty
_is_ about revenge – it’s certainly not about restorative justice or the
prevention of crime. And yet it’s carried out in a bloodless, processual,
legalized manner. Emotionless killing is unsettlingly creepy, and there’s
certainly nothing cathartic or satisfying – let alone virtuous – about this
kind of legalized “revenge” at the hands of a dispassionate third party. It no
longer resembles anything like honorable revenge. So what’s the point?

There’s a certain kind of death penalty apologist – not all, just some – who
remind me a lot of a police officer from Uvalde. In May 2022, a mass shooting
occurred at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas. 18-year-old Salvador
Ramos killed nineteen students and two teachers, and wounded seventeen others.
There have been several scandals involving the police department, and we won’t
get into them now, but it seems clear that the police were too afraid to do
much of anything as the children were being massacred. One image from a
security camera made quite an impression on me:

It’s plausible that human error is the ultimate source of moral arbitrariness
in the death penalty system. But human beings are involved at every single
stage of the process. So, it’s reasonable to conclude that we will never
eliminate moral arbitrariness from the death penalty system.

[It took 10 minutes to convict 14-year-old George Stinney Jr. It took 70 years
after his execution to exonerate him –
WaPo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2014/12/18/the-rush-
job-conviction-of-14-year-old-george-stinney-exonerated-70-years-after-
execution/)

Likewise, it does not follow from “Some people do not deserve to live” that
“The state should end the lives of some of its citizens.” Ask yourself how
much you trust the police, the court system, and the state generally. Are they
the body who should be given this power over life and death? Who should be
permitted to kill us with impunity?

> “The standard argument for abolishing the death penalty holds that even when
> moral agents have culpably perpetrated heinous wrongs, executing them is an
> unacceptable attack on their dignity, something that even they do not
> deserve to suffer.”
>
> [_Jeffrey W. Howard, University College
> London_](https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/against-capital-punishment/)

> This response would have allowed Dukakis to retain his opposition to the
> death penalty and turn the tables on those who accused him of being ‘soft on
> crime’. Now it’s the proponents of capital punishment who are clinical,
> cowardly, and ‘by the book’. They’re the ones who want a torturous legal
> bureaucracy to do what a decent husband should want to do himself. By
> tapping into virtuous qualities of revenge, Dukakis could have had the best
> of both worlds.
>
> Critics of the death penalty often refer to it as ‘legalized revenge’, but
> the truth is closer to the opposite. Honor cultures, as we’ve seen, think
> it’s shameful when third parties punish people who have wronged them or
> their families. Revenge is personal. Most arguments against the death
> penalty involve deterrence and racial bias, and thus far arguments haven’t
> resonated with a majority of the US population. Is the death penalty a
> deterrent? Probably not, but proponents can reply that it’s not about
> deterrence; it’s about justice. Is there racial bias in how the death
> penalty is applied? Absolutely. But advocates can reply that we must work to
> eliminate the racial bias, not prohibit the practice. But what if, like my
> hypothetical Dukakis, opponents called the death penalty dishonorable—a sign
> of cowardice and weakness? This challenge might have greater resonance,
> especially for people in the so-called honor states where capital punishment
> is most popular.”
>
> _Why Honor Matters_ (pp.150-151)

He begins with an illustration from the 1988 presidential debates, in which
Michael Dukakis, leading the polls at the time, is widely believed to have
fumbled an answer so spectacularly that it cost him the election. Moderator
Bernard Shaw asked, “If [your wife] Kitty Dukakis were raped and murdered,
would you favor an irrevocable death penalty for the killer?”

This requirement of certainty – in addition to ignoring the fact that this is
effectively the standard already – does nothing to undermine other ways in
which the accused could be unworthy of capital punishment. We could be certain
that the defendant was guilty of stealing a spoon. Of course, they wouldn’t
deserve to be hanged for this offense, though that’s exactly what happened to
13-year-old Andrew Brenning in 1801. As Joshua Marquis – an advocate of the
death penalty – admits, many of those presently on death row do not deserve
the death penalty. The correct determination of guilt is no guarantee that the
offense will warrant capital punishment. It was the case in 1801, and it’s
still the case today.

It’s not enough to defend the idea that we have free will, that we’re
responsible for our actions, that some have committed unspeakable acts of
evil, or even that the worst of the worst deserve to die. If you defend the
death penalty, you _must_ defend the death penalty _in practice_ , not just in
theory. People will be killed in practice, not in theory. To defend capital
punishment _is to defend_ the police, the courts, and the state generally in
its ability to determine guilt and carry out punishments. Abstract moral
arguments are insufficient: _You need to defend the state explicitly_ if you
want your case for capital punishment to withstand an iota of scrutiny. Even
if some people deserve to die, it wouldn’t mean a given organization should
have the legitimacy and power to carry out executions.

Sommers believes that we are capable of “reorient[ing] our understanding of
justice to reflect what’s true and good about revenge without incurring its
unacceptable costs”, but that this would likely require a more fundamental
reevaluation of our Enlightenment values and our rejection of honor culture.
Honor can ward off cowardice, shamelessness, and selfishness. Properly
contained, it can engender courage, integrity, self-respect, loyalty,
solidarity, and potentially cure some measure of alienation and atomization.
If you’re at all interested in moral philosophy and moral psychology, I can’t
recommend the book enough (and if that doesn’t convince you, then buy it to
help assuage my guilt over including a gigantic blockquote).

Most of us are naturally drawn into _some_ stories of revenge, fictional or
not, and repelled by others. What explains this distinction in many cases is
not a blanket condemnation or affirmation of revenge. I think it has more to
do with those conditions Sommers identifies. For example, in the summer of
2014, three Israeli settlers drove through East Jerusalem looking to avenge
the deaths of three other Israelis in the West Bank. The settlers’ were
looking for someone “lightweight,” who could be easily targeted. They came
across a young Palestinian named Mohammad, sixteen years old, and threw him in
their car before speeding off to a more remote area. The three settlers beat
the teenager to death and then set him on fire. Although they attempted to
destroy all the evidence, they were quickly caught and convicted of murder. As
Sommers explains,

> “‘Bernard, as you know, I’ve been against the death penalty all of my life.
> I don’t think it’s the state’s business to end the lives of its citizens, no
> matter how heinous their actions. And I’ll tell you something else: if Kitty
> had been raped and murdered, I wouldn’t want the man executed by lethal
> injection fifteen years later, after dozens of appeals and legal challenges.
> I’d want to track down that son of a bitch before the law could get ahold of
> him and kill him myself with my bare hands. I’d think it was my job to do
> it, not some district attorney or judge or jury of twelve people who didn’t
> even know her. Maybe society can’t allow that to happen, but that’s what I’d
> want to do in that situation.’

Of course, those who (at least profess to) think there’s nothing good about
revenge won’t be moved by this one way or the other. For those of us who see
something _good_ about revenge – some forms of revenge, that is – you have to
ask yourself if its virtues are present in our death penalty system.

Sommers, in the light of his more general defense of our moral intuitions
concerning honor and dishonor, offers a novel argument against the death
penalty at the end of the fifth chapter of his book. He doesn’t try to argue
that revenge killing is always impermissible. Quite the contrary – there are
virtuous qualities of revenge.

I think Realism entails Precision/Sharpness. Phenomenal precision is the
notion that experience is not vague; it is completely and utterly precise
whether experience is present. For this reason, phenomenal consciousness is
sharp: it doesn’t admit of borderline cases. Put simply, it is either like
something to be or it is not. To see the truth of “it is either like something
to be or it is not,” we need only consider the alternative and try to imagine
a borderline case of experience. Can it “kind of” be like something? No, for
then it is like something. Can it merely “seem” to be like something? No, for
the same reason. Can it “just barely” be like something? It is either like
something to be or it’s not — there’s actually no middle ground to be had
between these two states. Experience is not vague in this sense.

‪(Of course I mean emergent in the weak sense, e.g. in the way that
biochemistry, tables, and whirlpools are emergent. Consciousness could still
be strongly emergent as naturalistic dualists take it to be.‬)

There are a few ideas that, taken together, have led me away from physicalism.
These points could factor into an argument against physicalism; namely, that
ordinary physicalism doesn’t provide us with tools adequate to explain what we
know about our world. The first and most important of these ideas that have
led me away (or astray) is an unshakable realism about phenomenal
consciousness. By phenomenal consciousness, I mean experience: _being_ such
that there’s something that it is like to be. If it’s like something to be,
phenomenal consciousness is present. Realism about experience is, as Galen
Strawson puts it, “the obligatory starting point for any remotely realistic
(indeed any non-self-defeating) theory of what there is.”

[ARTWORK: Greg Dunn](Greg Dunn). _The laminar structure of the cerebellum, a
region involved in movement and proprioception (calculating where your body is
in space)_.

If consciousness emerged, arranging subatomic particles into nerve cells
abruptly generates experience at an exact point. The lights are _completely_
_off_ when those same particles are arranged in a _slightly_ different way;
but arrange them as nerve cells, and it’ll feel like something for that matter
to be. So will one nerve cell do it? What about two nerve cells? If your
answer is 357,005 neurons, why wasn’t it 357,004? What’s so special about
nerve cells, anyway? They’re not made of unique material. They’re composed of
the same protons, neutrons, and electrons as anything else. So it must be the
_arrangement_ , right? Of course, I agree that altering the configuration of
matter will alter the contents of experience. But I can’t agree that altering
the configuration of matter will alchemize non-experiential stuff into
experiential stuff.

Experience is unobservable objectively. If it wasn’t for the fact that we
ourselves are conscious, there would be no evidence that consciousness exists.
No objective description, on its own, will ever imply the existence of
anything that is not objective. We can describe everything about the human
brain and its emergence objectively, but that third-person description will
exclude the first-person point of view, without which it wouldn’t be a
conscious experience at all. How could we bridge this divide without strong
emergence?

This strange fact about experience (that it is not vague) leads us to a
sorites-style argument against the emergence of consciousness.

So let us imagine the emergence of experience. There is only unfeeling, non-
experiential physical stuff on the most fundamental levels of our universe.
It’s not like anything for an electron, presumably. There’s no feeling or
sensation, no emotion, no qualitative experience at all, of any kind. Now
follow the plot of emergence that we’ve pieced together from the most
fundamental levels of the universe to the most highly emergent levels. If
we’re starting with, say, subatomic particles, they combine to make atoms,
which combine to make molecules, which combine to make cells and organisms and
so on up the scale. From physics to chemistry, up to microbiology, all the way
to brains, sociology and macro-scale reality. Nothing new is being added at
any point in this upward journey; every level is reducible to the level
beneath it. Chemistry is just another way of talking about physics when you
zoom out a bit. We have a smooth gradient of gradual change all the way up to
brains. But at some point, it becomes like something for this matter from
inside. We go from the fundamental levels, which are made up of non-conscious,
physical material that has no subjective experience; and at some point, we get
conscious physical material that has a subjective point of view, which I’ll
say again, is really, really real. When we go from subatomic particles to
atoms, we’re using a new way of talking about _the same stuff that’s always
been there._ But if we take experience to be real, we cannot say the same of
its emergence. It’s not the same stuff that’s always been there; there’s been
a non-redundant addition to the inventory of reality.

The emergence of tables and chairs, or liquidity, or biology can be described
in purely structural, behavioral, third-personal terms. We go from one type of
objective description to another type of objective description. We never cross
the divide between objective and subjective, and there’s never a giant leap.

Nothing is non-controversial in philosophy, but I think Realism is a safe
premise. I think Precision is a safe premise. It’s showing that weak emergence
is vague — vague in every case — that is harder to show. It’s easy to show
that weak emergence is usually vague. Especially in the realm where we live,
where consciousness is supposed by physicalists to have emerged (that is, in
the realm of biology, tables and chairs, liquidity, niftiness, and so on). So
those are my three premises: Realism, Phenomenal precision, and the vagueness
of weak emergence.

Up until this point, I’ve only obliquely referenced the irreducibility of
consciousness. I didn’t explicitly add a Nonreductionism premise because I was
trying to get you to feel the intuition without simply saying that experience
cannot be reduced to parts that are not themselves experiential. That’s what
we’re trying to find out, isn’t it? So I talked about phenomenal precision,
the subjective/objective divide, and the anomalous lack of an intelligible
story of emergence.

> “I don’t think that you could arrange mere non-conscious physical stuff in
> such a way that [experience] would spring into existence. That would be what
> we call ‘radical emergence’—it would be like getting concrete things out of
> abstract things.”
>
> _Galen Strawson_

The only way to wriggle out of this and continue to affirm the weak emergence
of experience is to alter our concept of experience, effectively redefining
experience to mean something other than experience. It must be a mere concept,
an illusion, a convenient way of talking about the same stuff that’s always
been there. To affirm any of these is to abandon Realism about experience.
These are all forms of eliminativism; some of them explicit, some of them
semantically obscure.

For all the other examples of weak emergence, we have the same category of
concepts on either side of the emergent divide: we go from objective
description to objective description. But with consciousness, we go from
objective description to subjective description. How many objective
descriptions does it take to add up to a subjective description? How can we
describe _behavior_ in such a way that leads to _experience_ , i.e., how do we
go from third-personal description to first-personal description? At the very
least, there’s an epistemic problem here. But why should we think this
objective/subjective gap is also an ontic gap? Well, it seems impossible in
principle to give an intelligible account of how we go from one to the other.
If subjective reality emerged from non-subjectivity, we should be able to give
an intelligible account of how that happened. We can give a perfectly
intelligible account of how we get from chemistry to biology, from non-tables
to tables, from non-liquid molecules to liquidity. But how do we bridge the
objective and subjective? How can we start with third-person, objective
description and end up at first-person, subjective description? Physicalists
need to do more than simply appeal to unrelated examples of successful
reduction and cases of weak emergence without explaining why we should think
the emergence of experience was also a case of weak emergence. Look, I don’t
need all the details. Just the broad strokes will do! To quote David Chalmers,
“[Reductive physicalists] will have to give us some idea of how the existence
of consciousness might be entailed by physical facts. While it is not fair to
expect all the details, one at least needs an account of how such an
entailment might _possibly_ go.” All I want is an intelligible explanation of
how we get from non-experiential reality to experiential reality, just like we
have an intelligible explanation of the examples commonly mentioned. In those
cases, we have a smooth gradient of gradual change. How could this be true of
the emergence of experience, given phenomenal precision?

> “The demand for continuity has, over large tracts of science, proved itself
> to possess true prophetic power. We ought therefore ourselves sincerely to
> try every possible mode of conceiving the dawn of consciousness so that it
> may not appear equivalent to the irruption into the universe of a new
> nature, non-existent until then. Merely to call the consciousness ‘nascent’
> will not serve our turn. It is true that the word signifies not yet quite
> born, and so seems to form a sort of bridge between existence and nonentity.
> But that is a verbal quibble. The fact is that discontinuity comes in if a
> new nature comes in at all. The quantity of the latter is quite immaterial.
> The girl in ‘Midshipman Easy’ could not excuse the illegitimacy of her child
> by saying, ‘it was a very small one.’ And Consciousness, however small, is
> an illegitimate birth in any philosophy that starts without it, and yet
> professes to explain all facts by continuous evolution. If evolution is to
> work smoothly, consciousness in some shape must have been present at the
> very origin of things. Accordingly we find that the more clear-sighted
> evolutionary philosophers are beginning to posit it there.”
>
> _William James, The Principles of Psychology_

Allow me to concede that phenomenal consciousness _is_ a concept. Many
physicalists go to great lengths to establish this. I’m happy to grant their
point. What I’m unwilling to grant is that experience is _just_ a concept. It
clearly enjoys concrete existence. Our concept refers to something that is
directly, immediately known by every conscious creature. The reason for
holding, tiresomely, that one’s direct experience is merely an abstraction,
rather than a concrete natural phenomenon, is that it allows physicalists to
pretend to be Realists by way of diminishing the ontological weight of
experience. If one doesn’t want to bite the absurd antirealist bullet, they
may hold that one’s immediate experience is merely a concept. So one can claim
to be a realist about phenomenal consciousness while surreptitiously denying
Realism. I’m not a fake realist about experience. I’m a real realist, which
means I accept experience as the most certainly known, concretely existing
natural phenomenon. To insist otherwise would mean that phenomenal
consciousness is “real” in only a very limited sense. The bottom line: the
experience you’re having right now is not just a convenient way of talking
about the world. It’s really, really real — real in a deeper sense than most
things we’re realists about.

Physicalism seems to be unable to explain phenomenal consciousness, since it
would require us to redefine consciousness in a way tantamount to its denial.
(Nonreductive physicalists are a little better off, since they don’t deny the
most certainly known natural phenomenon, but their nonreductive position
amounts to dualism of one kind or another.)

my problem with emergence is it makes mental causation impossible. In assuming
that mind derives from matter, the subjective becomes a second class citizen
totally derivative of the more real particles. Since other minds are invisible
entities if they have no efficacy there is no theory of the mind that can ever
make sense since another private conscious being like me can only be theorized
based on its effects. see <https://philpapers.org/rec/SLEPAR> and  
<https://philpapers.org/rec/SLESA>

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F02%2F15%2Fcan-physicalism-explain-phenomenal-consciousness%2F&signup_flow=account)

Phenomenal consciousness possesses more ontological weight than chairs or
biology or liquidity. Those are just different vocabularies. Experience, on
the other hand, is not a different way of talking about the same stuff that’s
always been there. If it emerged, it’s something new — something new that’s
concretely real. We’ve added to the ontological inventory of reality in way
disanalogous to biochemistry. Furthermore, this new concrete reality of
experience must have emerged at a _precise_ _moment_ , since it’s not vague
whether or not experience is present. This is not weak emergence. Weak
emergence is not characterized by a sudden leap.

> “Very roughly if consciousness does not admit of borderline cases, then we
> will have to suppose that some utterly precise micro-level change—down to an
> exact arrangement of particles—marked the first appearance of consciousness
> (or the change from non-conscious to conscious embryo/foetus), and it is
> going to seem arbitrary that it was that utterly precise change that was
> responsible for this significant change in nature.”
>
> _Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy_

Let’s return for a moment to Realism. I take experience to be the most
certainly known real, natural, physical, concrete phenomenon. “Natural” and
“physical” deserve their own discussion, but for now, I want to focus on
concrete. “Concrete” here means “not abstract.” By “abstract,” I’m not
diverging from the usual philosophical sense of abstract, wherein some
philosophers hold that abstract objects — e.g. numbers or concepts — exist and
can safely be considered real. I think experiential goings-on are plainly
concrete and not abstract. It seems absurd to take my direct experience and
claim that it’s merely an abstract concept, but it’s worth taking a moment to
address this increasingly well-worn physicalist escape route.

The arbitrariness objection is certainly an interesting one that I’d like to
see physicalists contend with. However, I think the more serious consequence
of phenomenal precision is the charge of strong emergence. This is for two
reasons. First, I find strong emergence to be deeply implausible.

Phenomenal precision is one reason experience is different from tables and
chairs, biology and beards, piles of sand and when the day becomes the night.
It’s vague when sand becomes a pile of sand. There is no precise moment the
day becomes the night. There is no single hair that turns stubble into
beardness. There is no particulate change in the construction of a chair when
we cross the chair/not-a-chair dividing line. There are borderline cases: I
could continually deform a chair, and when it ceases to be a chair is vague.
Any point you choose will be arbitrary. But as we’ve seen, it is either like
something to be or it is not. There is no smooth gradient of gradual change
that ordinarily marks weak emergence at this level. I couldn’t start with
consciousness and continually deform it until it wasn’t really clear whether
it was conscious or not. (This is one reason functionalism is probably not
true, since functions are essentially vague.)

Physicalists think experience emerged somewhere in the realm of complex
organisms. The precision of the emergence of experience, at this organismal
level, is highly anomalous. We’re not talking about an ordinary case of
emergence here. I don’t think phenomenal precision demonstrates that
experience is definitely irreducible, but I think it’s a hint that it is. If
experience is irreducible, then its emergence (if it emerged) would have the
precise character I’ve been describing. So for physicalists, phenomenal
precision is an anomaly. The transition from objective to subjective is
another anomaly. The lack of an intelligible story is an anomaly.

If I had to offer a one-sentence response to the question, “Why aren’t you a
physicalist?” I would borrow Scott Clifton’s (also known as Theoretical
Bullshit) succinct answer when the question was put to him: “Because
consciousness is a thing.”

> “Any living organism, including a human being, is a complex material system.
> It consists of a huge number of particles combined in a special way. Each of
> us is composed of matter that had a largely inanimate history before finding
> its way onto our plates or those of our parents. It was once probably part
> of the sun, but matter from another galaxy would do as well. If it were
> brought to earth, and grass were grown in it, and milk from a cow that ate
> the grass were drunk by a pregnant woman, then her child’s brain would be
> partly composed of that matter. Anything whatever, if broken down far enough
> and rearranged, could be incorporated into a living system. No constituents
> besides matter are needed.”

A phenomenon that is the product of strong emergence is not reducible to or
deducible from underlying phenomena. A phenomenon that is the product of weak
emergence _is_ reducible to or deducible from underlying phenomena. And if we
can show that weak emergence is always vague, and establish phenomenal realism
and precision, then that means the emergence of experience must have been a
case of strong emergence. If this is true, physicalism is false. Physicalists
must reject Realism, Precision, or the vagueness of weak emergence to escape.

Another distinguishing factor in the case of experience, in addition to the
unique objective/subjective divide, is the ontological status of experience
versus that of a chair or a whirlpool. “Whirlpool” is a useful way of talking
about some concrete reality X. Similarly, “chair” is a convenient concept;
it’s a helpful way of talking about some concrete reality Y. But there’s more
ontological weight to experience than there is to a chair. A chair is a
concept that refers to some concrete reality. Experience, on the other hand,
_is_ the concrete reality — it’s not just a convenient way of talking about
some unknown thing-in-itself to which we have no direct access.

By physicalism, I mean reductive physicalism. The sort of physicalist or
materialist I’m concerned with affirms the existence of phenomenal
consciousness, which they believe has emerged from entirely non-experiential
concrete reality. There are more liberal versions of physicalism on offer,
like Strawson’s physicalism, but today, I’m only concerned with physicalism in
the ordinary sense — the kind that asserts that the intrinsic nature of matter
is non-experiential. Some might object to that characterization because they
don’t like the language of intrinsic natures. Maybe they think matter has no
intrinsic nature, that it’s all just structure and behavior. That’s fine, and
it happens to make the case against physicalism even easier. (As a brief
aside, it should be mentioned that a rejection of physicalism does not entail
that one rejects anything about physics or physical science. Many forms of
non-physicalism, certainly my form, are not _in any way_ in conflict with
naturalism, atheism, or physical science.)

Physicalists think experience emerges weakly, in the same sense that biology
and tables and whirlpools emerge. Biology emerges out of chemistry. Liquidity
emerges from molecules which are not liquid. Tables emerge from matter which
is not tables. So we have no trouble getting A from ~A in all sorts of cases.
So why should experience be any different?

If you’re a reductionist, you’re committed to the idea that emergence is
really a story of _the same stuff that’s always been there_ evolving into
different processes. But if there was this transition from it not being like
anything to it being like something, that would mean you’re wrong… _unless_
it’s not _really_ like something. It’s not like anything at the fundamental
levels; it’s not really like anything up here. You could say it’s just a
concept, or just a way of talking about different collections of matter.
Speaking in the language of molecules, for example, is just a way of talking
about collections of physical matter arranged molecule-wise. The atom isn’t
some kind of ontologically separate thing from the protons and neutrons and
electrons that constitute it. Atoms are entirely reducible to their component
parts. And crucially, we have an intelligible story of how we get from one to
the other where we can clearly see that it’s the same stuff that’s always been
there. Consciousness, however, is not just another “way of talking about.” It
really looks as though something novel has emerged. If experience emerged, we
have an appearance of an entirely new, concretely real, natural phenomenon.

Finally, we have Monism, which shouldn’t be too controversial with
materialists. To deny Monism, obviously, would be to reject materialism.
However, monism comes in many varieties, not just the materialist variety.
Neutral monists, idealists, and panpsychists endorse Monism. Panpsychists can
even endorse a more specific version of Monism, as Thomas Nagel explains in
his essay Panpsychism (1979). Rather than taking “Monism” as a premise in his
argument, he takes “Material Composition” as a premise.

Here’s the problem for physicalism: once we grant that experience is real and
irreducible, we can know that physicalism is false. And once we accept we need
strong emergence to get experience, we’ve admitted that experience _is_
irreducible. Saying that a phenomenon emerged weakly is another way of saying
it’s reducible. Weak emergence is in the business of offering reductive
explanation. If we think strong emergence is required, the phenomenon in
question is irreducible. And once we’ve accepted that experience is real and
irreducible, it’s over for physicalism.

Third, Nonemergence. Here I need to distinguish between “weak emergence” and
“strong emergence.” Weak emergence is the kind of emergence that’s ubiquitous
in the natural sciences. Atoms emerge from subatomic particles; molecules
emerge from atoms; organisms emerge from molecules; societies emerge from
organisms. At no point is there a _truly_ emergent phenomenon; there are no
new concreta that have been added to the ontological inventory of reality. The
weak sort of emergence is to be distinguished from strong emergence, which,
historically, has simply been called emergence. David Chalmers is a prominent
contemporary emergentist, whose naturalistic dualism makes use of strong
emergence. He thinks that if consciousness emerged, it must have been an
instance of strong emergence. To accept that experience emerged strongly is to
be a dualist in some sense. **Strongly emergent phenomena are not identical
to, reducible to, or deductible from other phenomena.** But on physicalism,
there are no giant leaps in nature that could be characterized as strong
emergence. One cannot simultaneously hold reductive physicalism _and_ the view
that the emergence of experience was a case of strong emergence, since to
claim that a phenomenon can be reduced (or to say that it’s identical to or
constituted by more fundamental parts) is to say that it emerged weakly.

So we’ve been touching on this throughout, but I want to make my reasoning
more explicit. The key premise here is “Weak emergence is essentially vague.”
If that can be demonstrated, physicalism can be demonstrated to be false. I
can easily defend the premise “Weak emergence is _usually_ vague,” and that
“Weak emergence is vague in the microbiological world in which we live.” But
once we accept that premise, that weak emergence is essentially vague, we only
need accept Realism and Precision to reject physicalism.

This is one of the most persuasive and clearly-written articles I’ve read on
the problems involved with trying to fit phenomenal consciousness into a
standard physicalist worldview!

Physicalism, which posits the weak emergence of experience, is in conflict
with Realism. I think in order to accept weak emergence with regards to
experience, you might have to deny Phenomenal precision. Up here in the
biological macro-world, emergence is vague. That the emergence of experience
is precise is a signal that this is not business as usual. This is not how
weak emergence is supposed to work. The physicalist also runs into the problem
that a new, concrete natural phenomenon has appeared, which is entirely
disanalogous from every other case of weak emergence. It’s also entirely
disanalogous because we’ve crossed the objective/subjective divide, and
because we have no intelligible account of how to get from one to the other.
If one wants to remain committed to the idea that consciousness emerged, one
must commit to strong emergence. And to accept strong emergence is to reject
physicalism.

> “Human physiologists may take a special interest in [physical brain events];
> but they can, in principle, be understood just as well, or even better, by
> creatures totally unlike us in physical and mental structure. To understand
> them such creatures need not take up our point of view. Physical brain
> processes can be understood objectively, from the outside, because they are
> not subjective phenomena. And no description or analysis of the objective
> nervous system, however complete, will ever by itself imply anything which
> is not objective.”
>
> Thomas Nagel

Second, one who endorses emergence of this sort is no longer a physicalist,
but a dualist. If experience could not have emerged weakly due to phenomenal
precision (i.e. because no smooth gradient of gradual change is possible), and
because our experiences are not merely concepts but concretely real, we have
strong emergence. If we have strong emergence, we no longer have physicalism.

Nagel’s Material Composition premise could work just as well as Monism for our
purposes here. (Strawson, along with other Russellians, has gone to great
lengths explaining how “material composition” is compatible with panpsychism;
indeed, how physicalism, properly understood, is compatible with panpsychism.)

Each one of these ideas we’ve discussed is more plausible than its denial.
Realism, Phenomenal precision, Nonemergence, Monism, the seeming impossibility
of bridging the objective and subjective, the fact that we don’t have an
intelligible story of emergence (and should have one). And these ideas, taken
together, arguably lead to panpsychism.

I honestly don’t understand how any rational person could think these are just
nothing arguments–unless they’re just being dogmatic about their preferred
metaphysical worldview…or they don’t want to admit that they’ve been wrong for
much of their lives.

So the argument against physicalism only needs a Realism premise and a
Nonreductionism premise. Some physicalists accept Nonreductionism but reject
Realism; others accept Realism but reject Nonreductionism (the more common
route). I think once you flesh out a reducible form of experience, your
position amounts to a rejection of Realism. I personally think physicalism
leads naturally to illusionism about consciousness, and many physicalists
agree. That’s why I’m not a physicalist. The argument for panpsychism needs
Realism and Nonreductionism as premises, but it also needs Nonemergence and
Monism to block the way to dualism. Again, once we accept Realism and
Nonreductionism, it’s over for physicalism. But if we want to get to
panpsychism, we have to add the Nonemergence and Monism premises.

To say that something emerged weakly is to say that it’s reducible. Weak
emergence is in the business of giving reductive explanation. If a phenomenon
is strongly emergent, that means it’s irreducible. Phenomenal precision, I
think, gives us a hint that experience would have to be strongly emergent. If
we accept that weak emergence is always vague, then it follows that
physicalism doesn’t work.

Why are these the only five broad options? Take a moral statement, like
“Torturing an infant for fun is wrong.” This is either (1) neither true nor
false, (2) false, or (3) true. If it’s true, the next question is whether you
think it’s true in the sense that realists intend — objectively true. If
something is _objectively_ the case, then it doesn’t matter how anyone feels
about it, reacts to it, or whether they even know about it. Its truth is
independent of observers. While a statement like “Vanilla ice cream is better
than chocolate” could be true, its truth would constitutively depend on
reactions, attitudes, feelings, etc. It could be _true_ , but not objectively;
it could be true for me but not for you. Likewise, one could think that the
truth of a moral statement depends on observers. This would make you a
subjectivist.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F09%2F21%2Fethical-intuitionism-w-michael-huemer%2F&signup_flow=account)

In his book, [Ethical Intuitionism](https://www.amazon.com/Ethical-
Intuitionism-M-
Huemer/dp/0230573746/ref=sr_1_1?crid=8CEYB73OM4PJ&keywords=ethical+intuitionism+huemer&qid=1663122578&s=books&sprefix=ethical+intuitionism+huemer%2Cstripbooks%2C75&sr=1-1),
Huemer argues that there are exactly five metaethical positions:

On the other hand, if you think “Torturing an infant for fun is wrong” is an
objectively true statement, you’re a moral realist. So, if you think it’s
neither true nor false, you’re an antirealist. If you think it’s false, you’re
an antirealist. If you think it’s true, but only in the sense that some people
prefer the “torturing infants for fun” ice cream while others prefer the “not
torturing babies for fun” ice cream, then you’re an antirealist. Finally, if
you take the spooky, unscientific, illogical, rationally indefensible view
that some things are actually right and other things are wrong, you’re a moral
realist. Whether you think evaluative truths are reducible to descriptive
truths or whether you think they’re irreducible divides the realists into the
fourth and fifth camps — naturalists and non-naturalists/intuitionists.

**Noncognitivism/expressivism:** Moral statements are neither true nor false.
Evaluative predicates do not even purportedly refer to any sort of property,
nor do evaluative statements assert propositions.

**Moral Non-Naturalism/Intuitionism:** There are objective moral properties,
and they are irreducible. Evaluative truths are not reducible to descriptive
truths. Additionally, at least some moral truths are known intuitively.

**Error theory/nihilism:** Moral statements (that imply that something has an
evaluative property) are all false.

Michael Huemer recently joined me to talk about metaethics, moral realism vs.
antirealism, and his own preferred theory of ethical intuitionism. We also
touched on evolutionary debunking arguments, companions in guilt, ‘moral
platonism’, widespread moral disagreement, moral fictionalism, mistakes
skeptics often make, and much else in moral philosophy.

**Moral Naturalism:** There are objective moral properties, but they are
reducible. Evaluative truths are reducible to descriptive truths.
Additionally, moral statements can be justified empirically.

**Subjectivism:** Some moral statements are true, but not objectively. For a
thing to be good is for some individual or group to (be disposed to) take some
attitude towards it.

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [debate](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debate/),
[error theory](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/error-theory/),
[ethical intuitionism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ethical-
intuitionism/),
[explained](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/explained/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/),
[interview](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/interview/),
[metaethics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/metaethics/), [michael
huemer](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/michael-huemer/), [moral
antirealism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-antirealism/),
[moral naturalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-
naturalism/), [moral non-
naturalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-non-
naturalism-2/), [moral
realism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-realism/),
[podcast](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/podcast/), [walden
pod](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/walden-pod/)

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F08%2F21%2Fnew-stuff-hot-off-the-press%2F&signup_flow=account)

[How did religion evolve? – w/ Naturalism Next](https://youtu.be/ARPxNYNgiSc).
We discuss “the cognitive science argument against theism” and the
evolutionary origins of religious belief and practice.

followed by Dustin Crummett’s response video, [What can we do about wild
animal suffering? ](https://youtu.be/gbCAW_fKNQE)

I’ve been very active in the last month or so, despite the relative quiet on
this blog. Here’s what I’ve been up to:

[“Religion is at the intersection of everything I care about” Interview w/
Sentientism ](https://youtu.be/e9iuwVIXDZc)This was a very wide-ranging
conversation I had with the host of the Sentientism podcast on my personal
background, young earth creationism, naturalism and how it’s defined, moral
realism, ethical intuitionism, divine command theory as a form of moral
subjectivism, animal ethics, the moral implications of panpsychism, and lots
of other stuff about what’s real and what matters.

Calling yourself an “agnostic atheist” is nonsensical. If you’re an atheist,
you think the proposition “God does not exist” is more likely true than not.
It’s that simple. If you’re a theist, it’s because you judge the proposition
“God exists” to be more likely than not. If you’re an agnostic, it’s either
because you’re withholding judgement and not assigning a credence to the
proposition for whatever reason, _or_ because you judge the evidence to be
roughly counterbalanced (i.e., your credence is roughly .5). Being an atheist
or a theist doesn’t require one to make totally irrational claims to absolute
certainty! Certainty is not the bar for knowledge (or for making a claim). It
never has been.

So first, agnosticism. There are two main ways one can be an agnostic. [(This
classification is based on Joe Schmid’s
classification.)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YTsSW7UeZpY&t=212s)

You can’t be an agnostic _and_ an atheist. The proposition in question is “God
does not exist.” If you think “God does not exist,” is more likely true than
not, you’re an atheist. If you think the evidence is roughly counterbalanced,
you’re an agnostic. If you don’t assign a likelihood at all to the
proposition, you’re an agnostic of a different sort. But you can’t
simultaneously think “God does not exist” is more probable than not _and_
think it’s 50/50. These are mutually exclusive positions. And, of course, if
you think “God does not exist” is probably false, you’re a theist.

This is a great piece, I loved reading it, but I have an issue with your
repeated definition of atheism as ‘someone who thinks its more likely a god
doesnt exist than does’ … thats not true, not to my understanding.. correct me
if im wrong, please! But as I understand it atheism is simply the lack of a
belief in a god. It doesnt tell you anything about the likelyhood the
individual thinks of there being no God. Only that they dont believe that
there is one. Its not quite the same thing. I am an atheist, i.e who doesn’t
think that I have any reason to believe in a God, therefore from where does
this claim of probability come from? I simply do not hold the belief that a
God exists until such a moment comes where someone provides me evidence either
that there is or isnt. That is hardly a position of stating that God is not
likely to exist. I do believe that, too, but my point is my atheism alone
doesnt tell you anything about that.

Absolute certainty is not an option available to mature believers or non-
believers. All we can do is to disagree about which way the balance of
considerations tilts. I think the task at hand is to construct competing
models that explain the world we see, then compare our competing models and
ask which does a better job explaining the data, all things considered.

Can you be an “agnostic atheist,” or are those terms mutually exclusive? I try
to explain how the famous four quadrant graph misunderstands the nature of
belief, knowledge, and agnosticism.

Based on the definitions on this article, I think you’re an agnostic calling
yourself an atheist.

A related concept in a discussion like this is _knowledge_. There’s a much-
discussed conception of knowledge, that of “justified true belief.” On this
view, you have knowledge if and only if you have a justified true belief.

Some people go so far as to claim that they don’t have beliefs, or that having
beliefs is somehow irrational. But again, “belief” just means you accept a
proposition, like “There is a rather large cat on my couch.” You have beliefs!
You believe the earth goes around the sun, because you accept the proposition
“The earth goes around the sun.” You don’t _just_ lack a belief in
geocentrism; you think it’s false. (In fact, I would say you _know_ it’s
false, even though you can’t have absolute certainty that it’s false.)

If your belief is true but not justified, it also seems wrong to say you have
knowledge. If you correctly believe that the earth orbits the sun and not the
other way around, but you only believe so because it’s raining outside, you
might have a true belief, but you have no good justification for your belief.
You just got lucky. So having a _true belief_ is not enough.

Beliefs can be held with different kinds of conviction: some atheists are
certain that god doesn’t exist, some atheists are very strongly persuaded that
god doesn’t exist, some atheists are fairly sure that god doesn’t exist, some
atheists are only slightly swayed in favor of there being no gods. What they
have in common is that they all believe, with some degree of confidence, the
proposition “God does not exist.”

Take _“My car is parked outside.”_ I accept that proposition, so I _believe_
my car is parked outside.

Another way you can be an agnostic is by withholding judgement. Here, one
simply refrains from assigning a credence or likelihood to the proposition.
Someone might favor this option for different reasons. Maybe they’re an “in-
principle agnostic,” and think it’s impossible to assign a credence to the
proposition in principle. Alternatively, maybe they don’t feel comfortable in
making a judgement, for whatever reason, so they don’t assign a credence. We
could split those into two different types of agnostic (a suspension agnostic
and an in-principle agnostic), but what they have in common is that they both
withhold judgement and don’t assign a likelihood to the proposition in
question.

I’m not an agnostic. I’m not an “agnostic atheist.” I’m an atheist because I
believe the proposition “God does not exist,” is more likely true than not.

We need a _justified true belief_ in order to say we have knowledge (on this
view). There’s something called the Gettier problem that seems to undermine
this, but the JTB conception of knowledge is still a good jumping-off point. A
lot of the controversies surrounding JTB have to do with adding another
condition to the three already mentioned, asking what counts as justification,
or otherwise adding to or modifying JTB. So, like I said, it’s a good place to
start if you want to think more about this issue. Like everything else in
philosophy, figuring out what constitutes knowledge is more complicated
business than you might think. (I’d recommend Michael Huemer’s book,
_Knowledge, Reality, and Value: A Mostly Common Sense Guide to Philosophy_ if
you’re looking for a pain-free discussion of this and many other complicated
issues in philosophy.)

Great analysis. Layman atheists fail to grasp some simple concepts and make
fatal mistakes like defining atheism as a lack of belief and mixing
agnosticism with atheism.

We haven’t said anything about _certainty_. Certainty would be having a
credence of 1, or 100%. No one in epistemology thinks that you’re an agnostic
if you have less than absolute certainty in a proposition. That’s just not
what the word means. If you assign a credence of .99 to the proposition “God
does not exist,” you’re not an agnostic. You’re an atheist.

I wont be able to rephrase it any differently so if you dont catch my drift I
doubt you will

The problem with this four-quadrant graph is that it’s working with a
completely misleading idea of what “agnostic” means and what “knowledge”
means. It seems to conflate knowledge with certainty, and it implies that
agnosticism is when one has less than 100% certainty about a proposition.
Those are not small mistakes. And they render the whole chart useless,
unfortunately.

Richard Dawkins actually provided a much more useful way of approaching the
issue than the four quadrant graph: the Dawkins Scale.

No, though. Me saying I disagree with your statement about God existing
doesn’t mean I think he doesn’t or is likely not to exist. It just means I
don’t think you have sufficient reason to make a claim. I aknowledge that I
also don’t have significant reason to make a claim such as ‘God does not
exist’

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F04%2F22%2Fwhat-the-agnostic-atheist-graph-gets-wrong%2F&signup_flow=account)

1 is absolute certainty that God exists. 7 is absolute certainty that God does
not exist. A person around 4 is an agnostic. And there are gradations between
those points. This is actually much closer to the way philosophers of religion
approach the issue than the four quadrant graph, which really should just be
discarded. Dawkins’ labels and descriptions for these different points muddy
things up a bit, but the general approach here of assigning a _credence_ to a
proposition, talking in terms of _likelihood_ or _probability_ is a much
better way of approaching these issues. Dawkins’ point when he came up with
this scale was that being at a 7 or a 1 was silly. You can be at a 6-point-
something, but it’s irrational to go to a 7.

Here’s the proposition in question: God exists. Which best characterizes your
view? Strongly agree, agree, not sure, disagree, strongly disagree. I land
somewhere between disagree and strongly disagree, hence “God probably does not
exist.”

  2. Pingback: [CA82 What the ‘agnostic atheist’ graph gets wrong | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2021/04/25/ca82-what-the-agnostic-atheist-graph-gets-wrong/)

Intellectual humility is important, and I think that’s the real motivation
behind the chart. Thoughtful non-believers don’t want to make any irrational
claims to certainty, or signal that they’re closed off to the possibility that
they’re wrong. That’s a good thing, but that’s not really the issue at hand.
Very few atheists would assign a credence of 100% to the proposition “Goes
does not exist.” The word for a person who claims absolute certainty here
should be “moron,” not “gnostic atheist.” Unfortunately, I know a lot of
theists who say they’re absolutely certain that their preferred form of theism
is true. But certainty is not on the table for anyone.

That’s exactly what I’m inveighing against here. Atheism is not just a lack of
belief, at least according to virtually all academic philosophical sources on
the subject.

If your belief is justified but not true, it seems wrong to say you have
knowledge. You might have really good reasons supporting your belief that no
one can refute. But if it’s not true, it’s not knowledge. So having a
_justified belief_ is not enough.

Whether you say you _know_ God exists or doesn’t exist depends entirely on
your conception of knowledge. But if you believe God exists, to any degree,
you’re a theist. If you’re pretty sure God doesn’t exist, you’re an atheist.
If you’re absolutely certain God doesn’t exist, you need to rethink that, but
you’re an atheist. If you think God doesn’t exist, but you can’t prove it with
certainty, you’re an atheist. The bottom line is that _if you think the
proposition “God doesn’t exist” is more likely true than not, you’re an
atheist._

I know my car is parked outside, but I can’t be absolutely certain. Think
about how screwed up our language would be if we could only use the word
“knowledge” in cases where we had absolute certainty. We would never use the
word “knowledge,” except in a handful of cases, like knowledge about my own
mental states or basic logical truths. Again, certainty is not a necessary
condition for knowledge. An agnostic is not defined as someone who claims to
have anything less than absolute certainty in a proposition.

I think a desire for intellectual humility is what drives a lot of atheists to
call themselves “agnostic atheists.” That’s a good thing. But you don’t need
to claim to be 100% certain that God does not exist in order to be an atheist.
Nor do theists need absolute certainty to believe in God. You can be an
atheist who just says “God probably does not exist.” In fact, that’s the
normal way of being an atheist. That’s how most atheists, academic and non-
academic, use the term.

So one way you could be an agnostic is to withhold assigning a credence at
all; another way would be taking the evidence to be roughly counterbalanced.
_An agnostic is not one who claims to have anything less than absolute
certainty._ An agnostic is someone who thinks the evidence is roughly
counterbalanced or doesn’t even assign a credence to the proposition.

To be clear, the chart is somewhat ambiguous. I’m mostly working off of the
claims of those who use the chart. Often, when they say, “But do you _know_
God doesn’t exist?” what they mean is “Are you _certain_ God doesn’t exist?”
They also tend to have some mistaken ideas about the notion of “belief” and
“claim,” as well as agnosticism.

As an aside, I’ve also seen some funny ideas about the notion of “making a
claim.” Like, “I’m an atheist, but I don’t claim God doesn’t exist.” That is
an incoherent sentence. _Claim_ is a bit like _belief_ : it’s not as big of a
deal as you might think. Making a claim doesn’t require one to have certainty.
My claim is that it’s more probable than not that God does not exist. If
you’re an atheist, you’re implicitly making a claim about God’s existence.

So what about the supposed dichotomy between belief and knowledge? Well, it
can make sense to say “I have a belief, but not knowledge.” You _can_ have a
belief without having knowledge, since your belief might not meet the
conditions for knowledge (e.g. being a justified true belief). However, it
makes no sense at all to say “I have knowledge, but not a belief.” Again, if
you have a belief, that does _not_ mean you have no evidence, or you take it
on faith, or anything like that. It just means you affirm a proposition.

One way to be an agnostic is to judge the scales to be balanced somewhat
equally. You take the probability of a proposition to be roughly 50%, or .5.
In other words, you think the evidence is roughly counterbalanced. (Maybe
somewhere between .4 and .6 confidence in a given proposition.)

“It just means I don’t think you have sufficient reason to make a claim.” —>
“Another way you can be an agnostic is by withholding judgement. Here, one
simply refrains from assigning a credence or likelihood to the proposition.”

A lot of these discussions fail to get off the ground because of confusion
around the notion of _belief_. Belief, in these contexts, is not quite as
significant as many people take it to be. Belief is just a matter of accepting
a proposition. That’s how epistemologists and philosophers use the term. It
doesn’t mean you have _faith_ in the proposition, it doesn’t mean you have no
evidence for the proposition; it just means you accept or affirm the
proposition.

One thing that’s clear is that on this conception of knowledge, and many
others, you can have knowledge without having absolute certainty in your
belief, which is why this is relevant to the graph. Regardless of your
analysis of knowledge, it’s widely agreed that certainty is not a necessary
condition for knowledge. In order to say we know a proposition to be true or
false, we don’t need 100% certainty in our belief. Certainty is not a
necessary condition for knowledge.

However, even with such technology, we can’t end animal predation without
causing a massive disruption in the ecosystem. We’re talking about drastically
altering central attributes of a very complex, interconnected, dynamic,
highly-emergent system. Even if eliminating predation was realistic,
eliminating predation _and_ expecting everything else to remain fixed in place
is fairly absurd. It would make the asteroid that killed the dinosaurs look
like a footnote in earth’s history! One of the lessons of climate change, I
thought, was that relatively subtle changes, like slightly altering the
composition of the atmosphere, could lead to dramatic consequences. Given the
interconnectedness of the natural order, waving a technological wand and
eliminating predation would plausibly cause the entire system to collapse into
nonexistence. It would be like surgically removing the spine of an elephant
and expecting everything else to carry on as before. Even if eliminating
predation while still feeding predators was realistic, doing so and expecting
everything else to remain fixed in place is not.

There are many things wrong with this line of argument. First, it’s not clear
that a consistent vegan, concerned with the suffering of animals, should feel
rationally compelled to intervene in wild animal suffering. It’s true that
predation, starvation, and so on have been responsible for an unimaginable
amount of suffering over the generations of life on earth. But (in addition to
not being a consequence of human action in the first place) that’s not within
our power to prevent. On the other hand, human beings _are_ responsible for
the existence of factory farming, and it’s entirely within our power to bring
that monstrosity to an end. Unlike industrial farming, predation, starvation,
parasitism, and so on did not result from decisions made by human beings. So
one could argue that since we’re not responsible for it, we don’t have an
obligation to solve it. Secondly, and more importantly, they could argue that
it’s not within our power to ameliorate it even if we decided to do something
about it.

On the topic of ending suffering, are you familiar with the Qualia Research
Institute, and if so, do you think their ideas and goals are at all feasible?

> “…for practical purposes I am fairly sure, judging from man’s past record of
> attempts to mold nature to his own aims, that we would be more likely to
> increase the net amount of animal suffering if we interfered with wildlife,
> than to decrease it.”

“Ought implies can” is a plausible moral principle: If you can’t do it, then
you’re not obligated to do it. For instance, no one can find fault in you for
failing to do something that would be physically impossible. In the absence of
some very surprising future technology, we cannot end animal predation. For
the sake of argument, though, let’s say such technology did arrive. Gene
editing is more and more of a reality, and gene drives make it possible to
alter the genetic character of entire populations relatively quickly. It’s not
as if it would violate the laws of physics to alter the genes of predators
such that their physical and psychological attributes were not aimed at
savagely killing and eating other sentient creatures. Science-fictiony, sure.
But it’s not impossible.

Although I do believe that if humanity survives long enough and continues to
advance technologically, we truly may have the power to end devastating
suffering altogether, at least within a relatively large swath of the
observable universe. Maybe.

My instincts are that human intervention in nature is guilty until proven
innocent. A very high burden must be met, and this can probably only be
achieved in cases of relatively minor alleviations of wild animal suffering.
I’m not against the idea in principle. Many of the arguments against
intervention in wild animal suffering are no good. (I haven’t discussed the
most common ones here because they’re so terrible.) I agree with Peter Singer,
who argued that “if it is in our power to prevent something bad from
happening, without thereby sacrificing anything of comparable moral
importance, we ought, morally, to do it.” I just don’t think it is within our
power to do it. [Neither does
Singer:](https://www.nybooks.com/articles/1973/06/14/food-for-thought/)

For me, this is the main argument. Aldo Leopold, the American conservationist
and environmentalist, summarized the concern like this near the end of _A Sand
County Almanac: With other essays on conservation from Round River_ :

> “In short, a land ethic changes the role of _Homo sapiens_ from conqueror of
> the land-community to plain member and citizen of it. It implies respect for
> his fellow-members, and also respect for the community as such. In human
> history, we have learned (I hope) that the conqueror role is eventually
> self-defeating. Why? Because it is implicit in such a role that the
> conqueror knows, _ex cathedra_ , just what makes the community clock tick,
> and just what and who is valuable, and what and who is worthless, in
> community life. It always turns out that he knows neither, and this is why
> his conquests eventually defeat themselves. In the biotic community, a
> parallel situation exists. Abraham knew exactly what the land was for: it
> was to drip milk and honey into Abraham’s mouth. At the present moment, the
> assurance with which we regard this assumption is inverse to the degree of
> our education. The ordinary citizen today assumes that science knows what
> makes the community clock tick; the scientist is equally sure that he does
> not. He knows that the biotic mechanism is so complex that its workings may
> never be fully understood.”

An argument that some animal rights activists will defend (though, in my
experience, it’s also defended by _opponents_ of animal rights) is that we
should, as a matter of consistency, try to intervene in wild animal suffering.
“Well, if I take a vegan’s moral principles seriously, then why should my
concern stop with industrial farming? Wild animals arguably have it just as
bad – if not much worse – than farmed animals. A consistent vegan would try to
stop predators from eating animals!” The argument is that if the ethical
principles espoused by animal welfare advocates are applied consistently, then
they’d be committed to intervening in nature, trying to prevent predators from
killing and eating prey. But that’s absurd, so we can reject the principles
defended by vegans and vegetarians. It’s crazy to stop a lion from eating a
gazelle, so I can go to McDonald’s later guilt-free. At least, that’s how it
goes with the opponents of animal rights – it’s a reductio meant to invalidate
vegan moral principles. There are, however, many vegans who argue that we
ought to reduce wild animal suffering as well. The argument is similar in both
cases: The general principles that inform our concern for animal welfare
shouldn’t be arbitrarily limited to animals that aren’t living in the wild.

It is unfortunate that God, in his infinite wisdom, designed a biological
order with evil built into the very structure of creation, but it’s not within
our power to bring an end to predation. It _is_ within our power to bring an
end to an unusual cultural practice that didn’t exist until somewhat recently:
factory farming. What’s more, we’re actually responsible for that.

Tagged [aldo leopold](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aldo-
leopold/), [animal ethics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-
ethics/), [animal
liberation](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-liberation-2/),
[animal rights](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-rights/),
[animal welfare](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-welfare/),
[enviromentalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/enviromentalism/),
[ethics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ethics/), [factory
farming](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/factory-farming/), [moral
philosophy](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-philosophy/),
[peter singer](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/peter-singer/),
[veganism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/veganism/),
[vegetarianism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vegetarianism/),
[wild animal suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/wild-
animal-suffering/)

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F07%2F25%2Fwe-probably-shouldnt-do-anything-about-wild-animal-suffering%2F&signup_flow=account)

> TL;DR
>
> [Wild animal suffering](https://audioboom.com/posts/8127169-56-we-probably-
> shouldn-t-do-anything-about-wild-animal-suffering) – is it possible to do
> anything about it? _Should_ we do anything about it? Even though the general
> principles that inform our concern for animal welfare shouldn’t be
> arbitrarily limited to animals outside the wild, I think intervention on any
> serious scale would be ill-advised. The natural order is deeply
> interconnected, dynamic, and awesomely complex. Drastic action, such as
> ending predation, would plausibly cause the system to collapse into
> nonexistence or end in some other irreversible catastrophe. Sadly, natural
> evil is inextricably built into the biological order.

When it’s said that “Love is just a chemical reaction,” or “Humans are just
bags of chemicals,” it’s the “just” that I have a problem with. Love _is_ a
chemical reaction—it is not _just_ a chemical reaction. Tunnel vision
reductionists take one description of reality and declare it to be the _real_
description of reality to the exclusion of all others. At the very least, the
given lower level of description is considered “more true” than higher-level
descriptions. These reductionists arbitrarily eliminate every other
description of the world except one, then act as if they’re the only ones with
the courage to look the hard truth straight in the face. However, if we
describe the biochemical correlates of love, we haven’t described everything
there is to know about love, nor have we given the “real” description of love.
We’ve provided _a_ description (one that’s often useful), but there are many
legitimate ways of talking about our world – scientific and non-scientific.
Even strictly in the realm of scientific inquiry, it doesn’t make sense to
choose one way of talking about reality to the exclusion of all others.

“But all this only works if we reject reductive materialism, right?” No! This
is true _especially if_ one accepts reductive materialism. On reductive
materialism, the feeling of love and the chemistry of oxytocin are both real
in _exactly_ the same way.

  1. Pingback: [The Dead — Where Are They? 2 Scientific Answer | Bijbelvorser = Bible Researcher](https://bijbelvorser.wordpress.com/2021/05/22/the-dead-where-are-they-2-scientific-answer/)

Two reasons this naïve reductionist tendency is elevated to pet-peeve status
for me is (1) If you criticize it, you’ll sound irrational and anti-science to
many, as if you can’t handle the cold hard truth. (2) Those who affirm this
reductionism, while they’re denying the complexity of reality to make it
easier for them to grasp, appoint themselves as the defenders of science and
reason. They’re pretending the universe is less than it really is in order to
make it simpler to comprehend. If all of human life is really just game theory
or chemical reactions, then it’s a lot easier to wrap your head around it. If
the one true key to understanding lies in evolutionary theory, or the
biochemistry of this or the behavioral psychology of that, then the world
becomes a rational place that’s less challenging to decipher and far less
shrouded in chaos and mystery. They sacrifice the truth for a comforting lie,
and manage to _reverse_ that charge on those who point it out!

This poor imitation of real reductionism is based on the fallacious idea that
lower levels of description – in this case, the neurobiological one – are
somehow truer, or even the only true ones. Higher-level descriptions, like the
ones that include purposes and mental states, are mere illusions. But why stop
at the neurobiological level? Why not say that neurons are also illusions,
since they are actually made of atoms? But wait! Atoms too are illusions,
since they are really made of electrons and quarks. Real reductionists
recognize that different languages are useful for different purposes. It’s
silly to say that some aren’t real because they’re emergent (non-fundamental).
If the experience of love isn’t real, then neither is the chemistry underlying
it.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F05%2F13%2Ftunnel-vision-reductionism%2F&signup_flow=account)

The basic problem with tunnel vision reductionism is that it has a narrow and
inconsistent notion of “real.” Neurons are taken to be real, but emotions are
illusory (or at least, less real than neurons). Both are considered emergent,
higher-level phenomena, but for some reason, the former is the _true_
description. But if love isn’t real because it’s a higher-level description,
then neurons aren’t real either! Neither are chemicals like oxytocin.

If you assert that “Love is just a chemical reaction,” and take that to be the
_real_ description, then what are you saying about the evolutionary
description? Or the behavioral description? Let alone the first-person,
subjective description. None of these are biochemical or neurobiological
descriptions, and yet, I still think they’re true. To hone in on one useful
description to the exclusion of all others is indefensible. Especially when
the description _is itself_ a higher-level description, which, by the lights
of the tunnel vision reductionist, means it’s not real! Their notion of “real”
is far too narrow, but it’s also inconsistent. If love isn’t real because it’s
a higher-level description of reality, then neurons aren’t real either.

[Listen to this post on Walden Pod. 36 – Is love just a chemical
reaction?](https://audioboom.com/posts/7866220-36-tunnel-vision-reductionism-
is-love-just-a-chemical-reaction)

Tunnel vision reductionism carves the natural world down to a sliver of what
it is in actuality. After it’s safely been diminished to something more
manageable (e.g. behavioral economics, computation, game theory, neurobiology,
evolutionary psychology), building a worldview is a much simpler task.

Carroll defends a view he calls “[poetic
naturalism](https://www.preposterousuniverse.com/poetic-naturalism/),” wherein
“there is only one world, [but] many ways of talking about the world.” Ways of
talking about the world include different theories, models, vocabularies,
stories, and so on. According to Carroll, “if a particular way of talking
turns out to be sufficiently accurate and useful, the elements in its
corresponding vocabulary deserve to be called _real_.” Poetic naturalism is
very nearly the opposite of tunnel vision reductionism. (One additional
instance of the latter: I once spoke to a follower of Ayn Rand who repeatedly
insisted that a romantic relationship is “just a transaction.” Though a
relationship is in some sense transactional, I dare say there’s a bit more
going on than that.)

> “When we talk about air in a room, we can describe it by listing the
> properties of each and every molecule, or we speak in coarse-grained terms
> about things like temperature and pressure. . . . It would be silly to say
> that temperature isn’t ‘real,’ just because the concept doesn’t appear in
> some fine-grained vocabulary. We talk about the world using different levels
> of description, appropriate to the question of interest. . . . Does baseball
> exist? It’s nowhere to be found in the Standard Model of particle physics.
> But any definition of ‘exist’ that can’t find room for baseball seems overly
> narrow to me.”
>
> Sean Carroll, [_Free will is as real as
> baseball_](https://www.preposterousuniverse.com/blog/2011/07/13/free-will-
> is-as-real-as-baseball/)

It’s inevitable that one who calls out reductionism of any sort will be viewed
with a certain amount of suspicion. You might find yourself being accused of
ignorance, or romanticism, or of harboring some anti-scientific prejudice.
Nevertheless I want to address a common type of reductionism, which I’ll call
[tunnel vision
reductionism](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q5QJdUMh-0A&t=1s).

  1. Pingback: [CA100 A Catholic and an Atheist Debate God | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/07/01/ca100-a-catholic-and-an-atheist-debate-god/)

It’s one thing to create something that can be misused to cause suffering.
Someone can drown in a bathtub, but it’s not as if the tub has a malevolent
purpose or function. But a predator’s physical and psychological attributes
are aimed at savaging conscious creatures. It’s not an unfortunate by-product,
or a misuse of some ability, or a perversion of nature. Evil has been built
into the very structure of nature.

**(2)** _Divine Hiddenness._ God’s existence is not apparent to many millions
of people, even those who are open to having a relationship with God. They
simply find themselves not believing, involuntarily, through no fault of their
own. We can call this the phenomenon of “reasonable nonbelief.” (If you don’t
think there are any reasonable nonbelievers, you need to get out more.) What
best explains this fact of rational nonbelief in God?

In my rebuttal, I look forward to responding to the arguments that John has
brought to the fore. But first I’d like to build a positive case of my own. I
am going to present a few arguments in support of the claim that God probably
does not exist.

**(6)** _Divine silence during tragedies._ Say you were a good parent, and you
had a child who needed to visit the doctor and undergo medical treatment. This
treatment wasn’t going to be pleasant, but of course, there’s a good reason
for it. There’s a moral rationale behind the surface-level unpleasantness.
This is essentially what many theists believe about apparent tragedies. There
is some greater moral purpose, some justifying reason that explains why God is
allowing it to happen. We may not know what that moral rationale is, in our
human ignorance – rest assured, there’s a reason. But a good father would be
there for his child in the medical scenario. He would _try_ to explain that
there is a purpose, and what that purpose was, and regardless, he would try to
be a comforting presence. The fact that many victims of tragedies don’t feel
God’s comforting presence is more likely on naturalism than theism.

I’d also like to briefly draw attention to something a bit more intangible:
Evolution seems to make for a more comfortable fit with naturalism than it
does with theism. Why else would the majority of believers continue to reject
theistic evolution? Why else would intelligent design and special creation
enduringly claim the lion’s share of Christian believers, even many
generations after the discovery of evolution by natural selection? Because
evolution is an insult to human vanity and doesn’t fit neatly with the
flattering Christian image of ourselves.

Those who are theists in the audience may have been thinking while I was
presenting my case, “Well, this isn’t a problem for me, because I can explain
divine hiddenness, evolution, animal suffering, and so forth.” I don’t dispute
that you could explain those things! But if you think that undermines my case,
then you’ve misunderstood my case. Merely being able to explain the data and
show that it’s not logically incompatible with your view is a low bar. We want
good explanatory models that predict our observations, in which what we
observe falls out of the model. We don’t want to have to endlessly jump
through hoops simply to account for ordinary observations like the ones I’ve
listed this evening. There’s nothing one can point to and truthfully say, “A
god is absolutely _necessary_ to explain that.” Likewise, there’s no suffering
so appallingly pointless that a believer couldn’t conjure up an explanation
for why an all-good, all-powerful god would continue to behave in a way
indistinguishable from non-existence. Same goes for divine hiddenness,
confusion around salvation, and so on. I think our task is to construct
competing models that explain the evidence, then compare the theistic and non-
theistic models and ask which provides a better explanation of the world, all
things considered. We take a look at the facts of our world – soteriological
confusion, eons of animal suffering, divine hiddenness, teleological evil –
and ask, “Would these facts _be_ facts in a world for which an unsurpassably
great, perfectly loving being is responsible?”

It’s truly hard to exaggerate the staggering amount of suffering endured by
sentient creatures over the generations of evolutionary history, most of which
were non-rational, non-moral agents. This is more than just a little
surprising on the hypothesis that an omnipotent, perfectly loving and moral
being is responsible for the natural world.

Think about God’s obscurity. If naturalism is true, there is no great mystery
here. God seems hidden because God doesn’t exist. So of course God’s existence
is not apparent, even to many who are open to a relationship with God and who
even desire to be in relationship with God. Comparatively, theists have less
reason to expect our observations, since, if God exists, it’s not a given that
his existence would be obscured from human beings with whom he desires a
relationship. Genuine divine appearance is _incompatible_ with naturalism, but
not theism. So, however likely we are to observe hiddenness in a theistic
world, the odds are not as high as they are in a naturalistic world. While
theists have a somewhat difficult time puzzling over God’s hiddenness,
naturalists have no hoops to jump through. We have a very straightforward
explanation of divine hiddenness.

In the context of arguments from evil, there’s a distinction made between
moral evil and natural evil (an example of moral evil being the misuse of free
will to hurt someone, and an example of natural evil being an earthquake or
other natural disaster). Teleological evil is a subset of natural evil. But
it’s harder to reconcile than ordinary natural evil.

Predation in the wild is the most obvious example. Predators with sharp teeth
and claws tear the flesh off their prey and snap their bones, and often start
feeding on them while they’re still alive. The natural order has been designed
such that animals must savagely kill and devour each other in order to
survive.

I think of myself both as an atheist and a naturalist. Naturalists believe
“that reality is exhausted by nature, containing nothing ‘supernatural’.”
There is only the natural world. Naturalism, then, entails that there is no
supernatural being such as God. Whereas, theists believe that in addition to
the natural world – which is common ground between us – there is also a
conscious, personal designer of our world: An unsurpassably great being of
perfect love.

Vast numbers of organisms are designed such that they cannot survive unless
they savagely kill and devour each other. Predators _could have_ instead been
scavengers, or herbivores, or some other kind of organism that absorbs energy
without tearing sentient creatures limb from limb. An unimaginable amount of
suffering visited upon confused sentient creatures could have easily been
avoided if God existed.

It needs to be emphasized that this is not like other disagreements. We
disagree over all sorts of issues about how the world works, but typically
there is no omniscient person who is trying to communicate to us the right
answer. On the other hand, God is a personal being who _is_ trying to
communicate the right answers to soteriological questions – and yet he’s
evidently failing to do so. Despite the best efforts of an omnipotent being
who has our best interests at heart, we’re beset with discord on an issue of
infinite significance.

_Here’s my opening statement from the recent debate with John Buck on God’s
existence:_

One final word on this “unknown reasons” strategy that many theists adopt when
faced with tragic suffering. Thomas Nagel once wrote of the problem of evil,
“Even if a theist supposes that the problem has a solution that we humans are
unable to grasp, that would mean that God, who created us with the capacity to
discover the laws of nature and to find the world scientifically intelligible,
has made us incapable of finding the world morally intelligible. These are
powerful reasons for doubt, and they have certainly destroyed the faith of
some believers.” To those theists who appeal to reasons unknown to us, at
least we can agree that the world seems morally unintelligible.

**(5)** _Teleological Evil._ Typically, naturalists believe that evolution by
natural selection accounts for the design of the biological order – at least
the broad strokes. Natural selection can at least help us explain the general
shape of the biological order. There are other forces at work, but it’s not as
if there’s an unsurpassably great being that had anything to do with
evolution, on naturalism. And unlike God, natural selection is an impersonal,
indifferent “designer.”

The North American short-tailed shrew secretes venom from salivary glands in
its lower jaw to paralyze prey. The point of the paralysis is not to kill the
prey, but to keep it alive for an extended period of time to allow for
prolonged feeding. The shrew can infect its prey and then graze on it for days
until it eventually succumbs to its injuries. The North American short-tailed
shrew is not guilty of wrongdoing. It’s not a moral agent. Neither are
parasitic worms or flesh-eating bacteria. They just have the physical and
psychological attributes they have in the biological order in which they find
themselves, where creatures are pitted against one another in a vicious fight
to the death that has lasted for eons and will continue for eons.

A range of the data of human experience is _more expected_ and _better
explained_ by naturalism than by theism:

I frankly find this impossible to believe. Nearly every attempted explanation
devolves into incoherence. To make matters worse, untold millions of human
beings, some of them children, have been the victims of psychological
terrorism that arises out of this soteriological fog. Naturalists, of course,
have no difficulty explaining this kind of discord. It would be very
surprising if every religion somehow landed on the same answer about
salvation. Actually, it would be evidence for theism if all the world’s
religions and denominations converged where it really mattered –
soteriological harmony would be good evidence for theism. This is not the
world we see.

In summary, then, we’ve seen six respects in which naturalism provides a
better explanation of the world than theism. For all of these reasons I think
that disbelief in God is eminently reasonable. The cumulative weight of the
evidence tips the scale in favor of atheism. God probably does not exist.

**(4)** _Animal Suffering in Evolutionary History._ There’s an additional
reason evolution is surprising on theism relative to naturalism (probably a
far more important reason). For hundreds of millions of years, an unimaginable
amount of predation, carnivory, starvation, parasitism, languishing, death,
fear and pain has taken place on earth. This is due entirely to God’s choice
to bring about his creation through the pitiless process of evolution. _This_
is the way a perfectly loving being brings about his creation? He could have
created the biological world in many different ways, including ways in which
many millions of Christians already believe he did, _without_ hundreds of
millions of years of animal suffering that could have been avoided entirely.

This kind of soteriological confusion is a matter of course on naturalism. On
naturalism, religion is a natural phenomenon, and your religious beliefs are
in large part determined by your geography, your familial and peer groups, and
your immediate cultural surroundings.

Here, we’re trying to decide which model best explains the data – as in, which
does a better job of predicting our observations with the fewest assumptions.
It’s clear that if our observations are entailed by one model, but not a rival
model, then it follows that we have evidence favoring the first model over its
rival, since the first assigns a higher probability to our observation than
the second.

Naturalists tend to believe that evolution by natural selection is primarily
responsible for the general shape of the biological order. Natural selection
is indifferent and amoral. Why wouldn’t purely natural processes occasionally
generate structures aimed at producing suffering for non-moral agents? There’s
nothing for the naturalist to explain here. We’re not the ones who are
committed to saying that there’s some kind of moral rationale behind the
degree, kind, and distribution of suffering in our world. This kind of natural
evil, more so than ordinary natural evil or moral evil, almost seems like a
straightforward disconfirmation of the idea that a perfectly loving and good
being is ultimately responsible for the design of the biological order. I’m
not making that strong of a claim this evening – only that teleological evil
in nature – in other words, malevolent design – is strong evidence against the
hypothesis that nature was designed, directly or indirectly, by an
unsurpassably great being of perfect love and goodness.

**(1)** _Soteriological Confusion._ Salvation is a common feature of theism.
Some will be saved, and others will not. That’s a common belief among theists
– _far_ more common than the belief that all shall be saved in the end.
Further, theists often imagine the consequences of lacking salvation to be
eternally significant, involving everything from annihilation to eternal
torment. Once again, very few accept universalism of any kind. Put simply, the
stakes couldn’t be higher. According to the vast majority of theists, an
unmatched _catastrophe_ will result from lacking salvation. That’s terrifying
enough, but worse is that theists do not agree on what’s necessary for
salvation. So most agree that salvation is necessary to avoid terrible
catastrophe, but they do not agree – minor detail – on how to get salvation.

_Teleological evil_ occurs in virtue of the natural purpose of a thing. It is
suffering caused by organisms acting in accordance with one or more of their
natural purposes or their design plan. The biological order – for which God is
ultimately responsible – features much teleological evil.

So, what should we make of this designer, whoever or whatever it is?
Indifference and amorality seem to be safe inferences: Whoever or whatever is
responsible for the general shape of the biological order is probably
indifferent and amoral. What Hume called “the strange mixture of good and ill
which appears in life” is easily accounted for, on that view. Those who
believe the designer is benevolent and perfectly loving _could_ offer _some_
kind of explanation of the mixture of good and ill, just as those who might
believe in a malevolent designer could offer some kind of explanation of the
mixture of good and ill. But indifference and amorality would make for an
easier fit.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F06%2F27%2Fgod-probably-doesnt-exist%2F&signup_flow=account)

In response to the existence of tragedies, theists will often invoke an
unknown purpose or unknown moral reasons, but this doesn’t affect the point.
Shouldn’t God be comforting the victims of tragedies? Isn’t that what a good
father would do? Some feel his comforting presence in the midst of tragedies,
but many do not. This fact is less surprising on naturalism than it is on
theism.

On the naturalist view, theists disagree about important religious questions
for the same reasons that people wear different kinds of clothes and speak
different languages: Geography, familial groups, peer groups, cultural
surroundings, and so on. Theists, on the other hand, have to believe that God
is trying to tell us the right answer, yet somehow, the answer is unclear. God
_could have_ communicated in such a way that there was no ambiguity, or
designed our minds such that we naturally intuit the right answer. And since
he desires what’s best for us, he has reason to dispel confusion on this
matter of unmatched importance. Clearly, the observation of soteriological
confusion is evidence favoring naturalism over theism.

**(3)** _Evolution_. Life is the product of evolutionary processes, not
special creation or intelligent design. On naturalism, there is virtually no
other serious contender explaining how humans came about other than evolution
by natural processes. It’s the only game in town for naturalism. But on
theism, God has options – evolution isn’t beforehand a sure bet. God could’ve
used evolution to create life, and some theists believe he did. But he also
could’ve used other methods – methods which are all but impossible on
naturalism. So the fact that humans and all life came about through evolution
is not surprising on naturalism. There is not really any plausible
alternative. For theists, on the other hand, evolution may or may not be true.
In fact – I don’t know if you’ve heard about this – many theists don’t accept
evolution. It just so happens that the option that turns out to be true is the
only one that could have been true on naturalism. In other words, the odds of
evolution are diminished on theism relative to naturalism simply as a matter
of probability. There’s a smaller number of options under naturalism than on
theism.

> People who accuse us of putting in too much violence [should see] what we
> leave on the cutting-room floor.
>
> David Attenborough

> The problem of teleological evil differs from the problem of dysteleology in
> that while the latter appeals to poor design as evidence against a supremely
> intelligent designer, the former appeals to good design (in particular,
> design that’s well-suited for causing suffering) as evidence against a
> supremely benevolent designer. To put it crudely, the problem of
> dysteleology is the problem of stupid design; the problem of teleological
> evil is the problem of malevolent design.
>
> Felipe Leon

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/), [biblical
confusion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/biblical-confusion/),
[christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [cumulative
case](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/cumulative-case/),
[debate](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debate/), [divine
hiddenness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/divine-hiddenness/),
[divine silence during
tragedies](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/divine-silence-during-
tragedies/), [does god exist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/does-
god-exist/), [doxastic
discord](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/doxastic-discord/),
[draper](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/draper/),
[evolution](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolution/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/), [god doesn't
exist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god-doesnt-exist/),
[nagel](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/nagel/),
[Religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religion/), [religious
confusion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religious-confusion/),
[religious diversity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religious-
diversity/), [soteriological
confusion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/soteriological-
confusion/), [soteriological
discord](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/soteriological-discord/),
[swinburne](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/swinburne/),
[youtube](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/youtube/)

The North American short-tailed shrew secretes venom from salivary glands in
its lower jaw to paralyze prey. The point of the paralysis is not to kill the
prey, but to keep it alive for an extended period of time to allow for
prolonged feeding. The shrew can infect its prey and then graze on it for days
until it eventually succumbs to its injuries. The North American short-tailed
shrew is not guilty of wrongdoing. It’s not a moral agent. Of course, I’m not
saying predators are evil; neither are parasitic worms or flesh-eating
bacteria. They just have the physical and psychological attributes they have
in the biological order in which they find themselves, where creatures are
pitted against one another in a vicious fight to the death that has lasted for
eons and will continue for eons.

It’s one thing to create something that can be misused to cause suffering.
Someone can drown in a bathtub, but it’s not as if the tub has a malevolent
purpose or function. But a predator’s physical and psychological attributes
are aimed at savaging conscious creatures. It’s not an unfortunate byproduct,
or a misuse of some ability, or a perversion of nature. It’s how the system
has been designed to work.

Tagged [animal suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-
suffering/),
[apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[argument from evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-from-
evil/), [arguments from
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments-from-evil/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [darwin](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/darwin/),
[evolution](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolution/),
[evolutionary animal
suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolutionary-animal-
suffering/), [evolutionary
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolutionary-evil/),
[evolutionary
suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolutionary-
suffering/), [felipe leon](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/felipe-
leon/), [god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/),
[Ichneumonidae](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ichneumonidae/),
[malevolent design](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/malevolent-
design/), [predation](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/predation/),
[problem of evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/problem-of-
evil/), [problem of teleological
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/problem-of-teleological-
evil/), [quentin smith](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/quentin-
smith/), [teleological argument from
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/teleological-argument-from-
evil/), [teleological
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/teleological-evil/)

> “People who accuse us of putting in too much violence [should see] what we
> leave on the cutting-room floor.”
>
> David Attenborough

Darwin was disturbed by a case of _teleological evil_ : Teleological evil
occurs in virtue of the natural purpose of a thing. It is suffering caused by
organisms acting in accordance with one or more of their natural purposes or
their design plan. This is not the problem of unintelligent design. “To put it
crudely,” [writes Felipe Leon](http://exapologist.blogspot.com/2017/06/the-
problem-of-teleological-evil.html), “the problem of dysteleology is the
problem of stupid design; the problem of teleological evil is the problem of
malevolent design.”

So, what should we make of this designer, whoever or whatever it is?
Typically, naturalists believe that evolution by natural selection accounts
for the general shape of the biological order. Unlike God, natural selection
is an impersonal, indifferent “designer.” Indifference and amorality seem to
be safe inferences in this case. Whoever or whatever is responsible for the
biological order is probably indifferent and amoral. What Hume called “the
strange mixture of good and ill which appears in life” is easily accounted
for, on that view. Those who believe the designer is benevolent and perfectly
loving _could_ offer _some_ kind of explanation of the mixture of good and
ill, just as those who might believe in a malevolent designer could offer some
kind of explanation of the mixture of good and ill. But indifference and
amorality would make for an easier fit.

Vast numbers of organisms are designed such that they cannot survive – they
cannot feed themselves or their children – unless they savagely kill and
devour each other. Predators _could have_ instead been scavengers, or
herbivores, or some other kind of organism that absorbs energy without tearing
sentient creatures limb from limb. A staggering amount of suffering visited
upon confused sentient creatures could have easily been avoided if God
existed.

In the context of arguments from evil, there’s a distinction made between
moral and natural evil. Teleological evil is a subset of natural evil, though
it’s harder to reconcile than ordinary natural evil:

We need not make that strong of a claim. More modestly, we could maintain that
teleological evil in nature – in other words, malevolent design – is strong
evidence against the hypothesis that nature was designed, directly or
indirectly, by an unsurpassably great being of perfect love and goodness.

Naturalists tend to believe that evolution by natural selection is primarily
responsible for the biological order. Natural selection is indifferent and
amoral. Why wouldn’t purely natural processes occasionally generate structures
aimed at producing suffering for non-moral agents? There’s nothing for the
naturalist to explain here. We’re not the ones who are committed to saying
that there’s some kind of moral rationale behind the degree, kind, and
distribution of suffering in our world. But this kind of natural evil, more so
than ordinary natural evil or moral evil, almost seems like a straightforward
disconfirmation of the idea that a perfectly loving and good being is
ultimately responsible for the design of the biological order.

This has so far been primarily based on Leon’s problem of teleological evil. A
distinct but related argument comes to us from [Quentin Smith in his 1991
article, _An Atheological Argument from Evil Natural
Laws_](https://infidels.org/library/modern/quentin-smith-evil-laws/):

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F06%2F20%2Fteleological-evil%2F&signup_flow=account)

Predation is the clearest example. Predators with sharp teeth and claws tear
the flesh off their prey and snap their bones, and often start feeding on them
while they’re still alive. The natural order has been designed such that
animals must savagely kill and devour each other in order to survive.

> “With respect to the theological view of the question: This is always
> painful to me. I am bewildered. I had no intention to write atheistically,
> but . . . I cannot persuade myself that a beneficent and omnipotent God
> would have designedly created the Ichneumonidae [parasitic wasp] with the
> express intention of their feeding within the living bodies of
> caterpillars.”
>
> Charles Darwin

> Not long ago I was sleeping in a cabin in the woods and was awoken in the
> middle of the night by the sounds of a struggle between two animals. Cries
> of terror and extreme agony rent the night, intermingled with the sounds of
> jaws snapping bones and flesh being torn from limbs. One animal was being
> savagely attacked, killed and then devoured by another.
>
> A clearer case of a horrible event in nature, a natural evil, has never been
> presented to me. It seemed to me self-evident that the natural law that
> animals _must savagely kill and devour each other in order to survive_ was
> an evil natural law and that the obtaining of this law was sufficient
> evidence that God did not exist.

> “Teleological evil appears to be a much more formidable problem for theism
> than mere moral evil or non-teleological natural evil. Perhaps the most
> obvious reason is that unlike teleological evil, moral and (non-
> teleological) natural evil involve no clear or otherwise natural presumption
> that such evil was intended by God. . . . By contrast, with teleological
> evil, it is part of the very design plan and natural purpose or function of
> an entity that it causes evil. In such cases, it is natural to infer that if
> there is a god, then it is part of the very intention of God to ensure
> horrific suffering…”
>
> Felipe Leon

Unlike mysterians, I think there are __ plausible options on the table. I rank
some kind of dual-aspect monism first (e.g. panpsychism, though I think some
consciousness-only monisms can also be squeezed into this category); second,
some version of dualism; and strong mysterianism third. So to be clear, I’m
not defending mysterianism as my first choice. Nonetheless, I think it’s a far
more plausible idea than flat-footed reductive materialism.

Mysterianism seems a bit defeatist, but it nonetheless may be true. There are
times when our minds bump up against their cognitive ceiling, and explaining
consciousness could be one of those times. We may never get an intuitively
satisfying answer to this question, just like I’ll never have an intuitively
satisfying answer to whether the universe is infinite or finite. To me, both
possibilities seem equally hard to concretely imagine. Maybe I’m asking the
wrong question, or maybe I’m like a golden retriever trying to grasp the
concept of a prime number. Either way, I’m not going to get a really
satisfying answer.

In a review of Luke Roelofs’ book on panpsychism, _Combining Minds_ ,
[Schwitzgebel commented](https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/combining-minds-how-to-
think-about-composite-subjectivity/),

> Every day, it seems, some verifiably intelligent person tells us that we
> don’t know what consciousness is. The nature of consciousness, they say, is
> an awesome mystery. . . . I find this odd because we know exactly what
> consciousness is — where by “consciousness” I mean what most people mean in
> this debate: experience of any kind whatever. It’s the most familiar thing
> there is, whether it’s experience of emotion, pain, understanding what
> someone is saying, seeing, hearing, touching, tasting or feeling. It is in
> fact the only thing in the universe whose ultimate intrinsic nature we can
> claim to know. It is utterly unmysterious.
>
> [Galen Strawson](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/16/opinion/consciousness-
> isnt-a-mystery-its-matter.html)

No doubt, there are truths that simply cannot be grasped by the human mind.
Given who we are and how we got here, why would we expect anything else? Our
intuitions evolved to help us survive and reproduce as social animals in our
environment. They’re mostly trustworthy within their domains. But that’s just
it – they have domains. Our minds are not _unlimited_ and did not evolve so we
could understand everything. In fact, you might have been selected _against_
had you been walking on the savannah contemplating the nature of the universe
rather than paying attention to the more immediate goings-on in your
environment.

For now, I’ll keep pursuing my various non-physicalist interests. If those
lead me to the same dead end that physicalism led me to, then I’ll add this to
the list of things Noam Chomsky was right about.

> are empirically equivalent: there is no experiment that can decide between
> them. That’s not really a surprise, as this is not a purely empirical
> question. It’s rather a question of why something that is publicly
> observable (brain activity) always goes together with something that is not
> publicly observable (subjective experience). This isn’t the kind of question
> an experiment can answer, just as questions about the fundamental character
> of ethics can’t be answered experimentally. One option is agnosticism. If we
> can’t decide between these views experimentally, then maybe we should simply
> say that we don’t know which is true.

Of course, if you _are_ satisfied with some option, then don’t let me rain on
your parade. I’m only explaining what the motivation for mysterianism might
be. If you find yourself in the state of mind, as I sometimes do, that there
are no good options on the table, then mysterianism begins to seem very
attractive. (I remember when I first started talking about panpsychism, I
described it as “the worst option except for all the other ones,” echoing the
adage about democracy. So this isn’t a change of pace for me.)

Tagged [arguments](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments/),
[chomsky](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/chomsky/), [chomsky
mysterian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/chomsky-mysterian/),
[consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness/),
[debate](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debate/),
[dennett](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/dennett/),
[explained](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/explained/),
[goff](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/goff/),
[haldane](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/haldane/), [hard
problem](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/hard-problem/), [hard
problem of consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/hard-
problem-of-consciousness/),
[iep](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/iep/),
[introduction](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/introduction/),
[mcginn](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mcginn/),
[mysterian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mysterian/),
[mysterianism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mysterianism/), [new
mysterianism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/new-mysterianism/),
[new mysterians](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/new-mysterians/),
[noam chomsky mysterianism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/noam-
chomsky-mysterianism/),
[panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/panpsychism/),
[philosophy of mind](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/philosophy-of-
mind/), [pinker](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/pinker/),
[qualia](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/qualia/),
[roelofs](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/roelofs/),
[schwitzgebel](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/schwitzgebel/),
[sep](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/sep/),
[weird](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/weird/),
[weirdness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/weirdness/)

In practice, it may be difficult to identify mysteries. We’ll never know for
certain if our “mystery” is a false positive. This, however, does nothing to
undermine the claim that there _are_ mysteries. Nor does it support the
contrary claim that we have limitless, Godlike intellects whose domain of
applicability is the entirety of nature. That, [as Chomsky
argues](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G8G2QUK_1Wg), is a straightforwardly
anti-evolutionary claim.

The stronger form of mysterianism – the kind associated with Noam Chomsky, for
instance – is far more pessimistic about gaining anything like a complete
understanding of consciousness, as well as other mysteries that fall beyond
our cognitive purview:

Many of these theories, he adds, “seem to leave common sense farther behind
the more specific they become,” leading him to the conclusion that “no non-
bizarre general theory of consciousness is available,” and, he suspects, not
even constructable in principle. [He
argues](http://www.faculty.ucr.edu/~eschwitz/SchwitzPapers/CrazyMind-130712.pdf)
that the truth in the metaphysics of mind is bound to be contrary to common
sense; and that we would not feel compelled to believe the right answer if it
was staring us in the face. Something “crazy . . . must be among the core
truths about . . . the metaphysics of mind.”

It seems as if there’s no objective way of settling this debate, and it’s
unclear whether the non-empirical resources we do have at our disposal are
adequate to establish a significant credence in _any_ metaphysical theory of
consciousness. It’s not that Theory A can’t be significantly more probable
than Theory B. Our credence is Theory A can be high _relative to_ some
competitor, but not high in an absolute sense. There’s just not much to work
from. If no publicly-available data can settle the issue, and no philosophical
method seems able to yield any degree of intersubjective agreement, then maybe
we should consider the idea that we are unable to solve the problem, or just
asking bad questions.

The “weak mysterian” or “temporary mysterian” position holds out hope that
some future revolution will show how to close the explanatory gap. One who
holds this moderate view says that what may look unbridgeable in principle is
really just an impermanent roadblock. We may not have anything approaching a
satisfying explanation of subjective experience now, but we could in the
future. We should keep trying. This is optimism of a sort, but it shouldn’t be
misinterpreted as validation of any of the existing options, which any
mysterian will regard as inadequate. What we need is a paradigm shift:

One caveat worth noting: even if one accepts Chomsky’s conceptual distinction
between problems and mysteries, given the difficulty of figuring out which
questions are which – problems or mysteries – it may be best to
methodologically pretend there are no mysteries. We could mistake a problem
for a mystery, and fail to pursue what could have been a fruitful line of
inquiry. Talk about insoluble mysteries may discourage exploration that could
be useful in ways we couldn’t have predicted beforehand. If we took the
mysterian attitude in other areas, some things would never have gotten done.
In practice, the question of how to identify mysteries is about as vexing as
the mysteries themselves.

> Now, my own suspicion is that the universe is not only queerer than we
> suppose, but queerer than we can suppose. I have read and heard many
> attempts at a systematic account of it, from materialism and theosophy to
> the Christian system or that of Kant, and I have always felt that they were
> much too simple. I suspect that there are more things in heaven and earth
> than are dreamed of, or can be dreamed of, in any philosophy.

Echoes of this can be found in Schwitzgebel’s case discussed earlier, but Goff
is far more optimistic about the possibility of using reason to resolve the
problem and reach an intelligible and satisfying theory of consciousness. I
tentatively share Goff’s optimism, as I’m not ready to give up and embrace the
mystery quite yet. Nevertheless, we should heed the words of biologist J.B.S.
Haldane, who said in 1927,

What are some other reasons one might be a mysterian? I’ve heard it suggested
that there may be a catch-22 at work here — our brains could never evolve to
be sophisticated enough to understand themselves. We can understand simpler
creatures, but we can’t turn our own cognitive capacities inward and gain a
comprehensive understanding. In order to understand our minds as they
currently exist, we’d have to become significantly more advanced minds. And at
that point, we’d still not be able to understand ourselves! That may or may
not bear on the hard problem of consciousness, whether consciousness is
physical or non-physical, and so on. The aim of mysterianism is to establish
that there are some limitations to our inquiry that cannot be overcome by
human minds. For one reason or another, we aren’t in a good position to affirm
theories of consciousness with a high degree of confidence.

> The “new mysterianism,” I believe, is misnamed. It should be called “truism”
> — at least, for anyone who accepts the major findings of modern biology,
> which regards humans as part of the organic world. If so, then they will be
> like all other organisms in having a genetic endowment that enables them to
> grow and develop to their mature form. . . . The endowment that yields scope
> also establishes limits.
>
> [Noam Chomsky](https://chomsky.info/201401__/)

The problem is that the question “What is consciousness?” is ambiguous. As
outlined a moment ago, there are at least two senses in which it’s profoundly
mistaken to think that we don’t know what consciousness is. (It’s even a
little strange to pose the question in the first place, since consciousness is
just…this.) But there’s a sense in which it’s not at all unreasonable to say
that the nature of consciousness is mysterious: we don’t know which account of
consciousness is true. Of course, in that case, there are better ways to
present the question. “What is consciousness?” is not a clear formulation of
the question of whether substance dualism, epiphenomenal property dualism,
reductive materialism, Russellian panpsychism, or any of our other
metaphysical theories of consciousness are close to the mark. This is the area
in which pessimism about “the mystery of consciousness” is an eminently
reasonable position to defend. The name for this pessimistic view is
_mysterianism_.

Of course, this practical demarcation problem doesn’t change the fact that
there _are_ mysteries (as far as we human beings are concerned) and that we
are biological organisms with a certain cognitive and physical structure –
structures which have domains of applicability and inapplicability. After all,
what’s the alternative? That we have infinite, Godlike intellects with
literally no limitations?

> If there’s one thing we know about the metaphysics of consciousness, it is
> that something bizarre must be true. Among the reasons to think so: Every
> well-developed theory of consciousness in the entire history of written
> philosophy on Earth has either been radically bizarre on its face or had
> radically bizarre consequences.

Though, truth be told, I’m not totally convinced we have a genuine mystery on
our hands. That’s why I’m actively exploring panpsychist and dualist accounts
of mind and matter instead of doing something else. But here’s one reason I’m
attracted to mysterianism: (A) we know there are mysteries, and (B) we have
arguably not made a ton of progress on deciding which metaphysical theory of
consciousness, if any, is actually true. If consciousness and its place in
nature is a genuine mystery, then the lack of concrete progress is to be
expected. Mysterianism would cleanly explain why we’ve moved past vitalism,
but haven’t been able to move past the same materialist vs. dualist vs.
panpsychist vs. idealist debates that were taking place centuries ago. So I’m
making what could be considered two distinct arguments here: pessimistic
induction and inference to the best explanation. As for the latter, we can
safely say that mysterianism would predict the gargantuan fray of conflicting
theories that never seem to resolve into a stable consensus. There are
ephemeral trends, but any survey of the history of the metaphysics of
consciousness will reveal an ebb and flow of opinion that never seems to find
equilibrium. This is to be expected on a mysterian view. So, one might
inductively infer from this history that no stable answer will be reached; and
they might add that this failure of significant progress is better predicted
by the mysterian hypothesis.

[Eric Schwitzgebel argues
that](http://www.faculty.ucr.edu/~eschwitz/SchwitzPapers/CrazyMind-130712.pdf)
the reason we haven’t made the kind of progress one might have hoped for is
that we have no reliable guide. No matter which side you take, it’s impossible
to avoid doing violence to common sense at _some_ point. Furthermore, science
isn’t as helpful as usual, and abstract reasoning can’t seem to lead to
convergence.

> Certain fundamental questions about the metaphysics of mind can’t, it seems,
> be settled by science, in anything like its current state, or by abstract
> reasoning. To address these questions we must turn to common sense. If we
> then have good reason to think that common sense, too, is no reliable guide,
> we are unmoored. Without common sense as a constraint, the possibilities
> open up, bizarre and beautiful in their different ways; and once open they
> refuse to shut.

Assuming we’re playing the “metaphysics of consciousness” game at all, I think
we have three broad options: (1) unifying mind and matter in some kind of
intelligible and satisfying way (2) separating mind and matter in some kind of
intelligible and satisfying way (3) recognizing that there will never be an
intelligible and satisfying resolution to this problem. I spend the most time
exploring option (1), defending my preferred way of unifying mind and matter
and criticizing the more mainstream ways of doing so. Trailing far behind in
second is option (2), dualism. But what about option (3)? Mysterianism, I
think, has a lot going for it. There certainly are mysteries (as far as humans
are concerned), and accounting for consciousness _may_ be one of those
mysteries. But why think we’ve stumbled on a genuine mystery here? It _could_
be the case, but why think it _is_ the case? Let’s take a brief look at
several different arguments that have been offered.

Mysterians believe that we will probably never know how conscious experience
and the physical world fit together. Human beings are incapable of resolving
the hard problem of consciousness. In other words, the true explanation of
subjective experience – whatever it is – is not something we could
appreciate.[ As Colin McGinn put
it](https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/books/first/m/mcginn-
flame.html), “Consciousness indubitably exists, and it is connected to the
brain in some intelligible way, but the nature of this connection necessarily
eludes us.” There’s also a weaker form of mysterianism, which we’ll get into a
bit later. (Both are reasonable, in my view, but the more uncompromising
version is the one I find attractive.)

> [T]he bond between the mind and the brain is a deep mystery. Moreover, it is
> an ultimate mystery, a mystery that human intelligence will never unravel.
>
> [Colin
> McGinn](https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/books/first/m/mcginn-
> flame.html)

> The brain is a product of evolution, and just as animal brains have their
> limitations, we have ours. Our brains can’t hold a hundred numbers in
> memory, can’t visualize seven-dimensional space and perhaps can’t
> intuitively grasp why neural information processing observed from the
> outside should give rise to subjective experience on the inside. This is
> where I place my bet, though I admit that the theory could be demolished
> when an unborn genius—a Darwin or Einstein of consciousness—comes up with a
> flabbergasting new idea that suddenly makes it all clear to us.
>
> [Steven
> Pinker](http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1580394-6,00.html)

It should be noted that for something to rise to the level of mystery, it does
not need to be inexplicable in principle to _all_ hypothetical beings. It
wouldn’t have to be inexplicable even to God, for instance. Whether there are
any mysteries in this superlative sense is an interesting question. But a
belief in the rationality of the universe leads me to think that any apparent
in-principle mysteries are really the product of badly-formed questions or
going beyond our limitations. For our purposes, we need not take a position on
whether there are in-principle mysteries in nature – only whether there are
mysteries as far as human beings are concerned.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F06%2F10%2Fmysterianism-rational-pessimism-in-the-metaphysics-of-consciousness%2F&signup_flow=account)

Since we’re organisms produced by evolution, we have a cognitive structure
that has a scope and limits, just as our physical structure has a scope and
limits. We can run, but we can’t fly. We can solve some mathematical problems,
but we can’t solve the hard problem or establish a satisfactory theory of
consciousness. Or so the mysterian argues.

Here’s one final reason one might be attracted to mysterianism. A version of
the view can rest on a foundation of agnosticism. Many theories of
consciousness, as [Philip Goff
explains](https://conscienceandconsciousness.com/2020/10/29/is-it-the-job-of-
science-or-philosophy-to-account-for-consciousness/),

There’s a sense in which this is clearly wrong. You know what consciousness is
simply by virtue of being a conscious creature. Of course, the inner life of a
subject does not immediately reveal how to _explain_ consciousness, (i.e.
which metaphysical or scientific account of consciousness is correct), but it
does immediately answer the opening question of “What is consciousness?” When
it comes to subjective experience, the having is the knowing: you know what
consciousness is by virtue of undergoing conscious experiences. In fact,
that’s the only way you _could_ know.

As I mentioned earlier, I worry about this kind of sentiment. On the one hand,
Haldane and Chomsky are undeniably correct. But the issue of _identifying_
mysteries in practice is what worries me. What if mysterianism is a self-
fulfilling prophecy? What if we’re discouraging people from seeking answers
when there are answers out there to be found?

So, if you’ve ever found yourself thinking “These are all terrible options,”
then mysterianism might be for you. But it doesn’t need to be framed
negatively. We could just as easily reframe it positively: everyone makes
really convincing arguments against opposing views. When materialists level
objections to dualism, they’re right! They’re offering good arguments. When
non-physicalists level objections to physicalism, they’re right! They’re
offering good arguments. Rather than thinking “All these options suck,” you
could just as well think that everyone is making cogent points all around.
There are good arguments against materialism, dualism, panpsychism, and so on;
there are really compelling reasons to reject each of these options. Maybe
there are deep, in principle reasons we can’t come up with a satisfying
explanation of consciousness.

One motivation for mysterianism stems from a dissatisfaction with existing
theories of consciousness, and perhaps glimpsing what seem to be in-principle
reasons that certain problems cannot be resolved. After being left thoroughly
unimpressed with each option in the metaphysics of consciousness, one might
reasonably conclude that the entire enterprise was doomed to begin with. As
explained by Chomsky earlier, our minds have limited domains, and there’s no
great reason to expect “understanding the metaphysics of consciousness” to
fall within our domain of understanding.

What is consciousness? This intractable question, it’s often said, is a great
mystery that philosophers and scientists will struggle to decipher for ages to
come.

Not only do we know what consciousness is, _all we know_ is consciousness.
Everything – _everything_ – comes to us through consciousness. As far as we’re
concerned, there’s _nothing but_ a world of consciousness.

According to Chomsky, there’s a conceptual distinction between problems and
mysteries. There are many problems which fall within our cognitive capacities
which may be difficult, but are solvable. On the other hand, there are
mysteries, which fall beyond the finite domain of our cognitive capacities.
Problems are things we _could_ solve, but mysteries are insoluble –
inexplicable to the minds of human beings, just as general relativity is
inexplicable to the mind of a raccoon. (Mysteries are species-relative: what’s
a mystery to a Martian might not be a mystery to us.)

Often I hear from nonbelievers that the Fine Tuning Argument is the best
argument the religious have to offer. So in the spirit of attacking theism at
its best, here are a few quick reasons why I don’t accept the Fine Tuning
Argument presented by the religious.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2017%2F08%2F05%2Fthe-fine-tuning-argument%2F&signup_flow=account)

Obviously, I’m a little biased, but I think Carroll mopped the floor with his
opponent. In my view, the fact that WLC still parades around using the same
arguments that Carroll destroyed here demonstrates Craig’s disregard for
scientific accuracy. He knows his audience doesn’t know any better, so he
continues trotting out the same flawed arguments in his relentless quest for
fame.

All this to say that if the current values of the universe were different,
maybe _we_ wouldn’t be here, but that doesn’t mean that some other form of
life couldn’t emerge. After all, when we consider the fundamental laws of our
universe, it’s not at all obvious that humans would eventually emerge. There
is simply nothing about the equations that describe our universe that
immediately suggest that humans will result, so we have no right to look at a
different set of equations and dismiss the possibility of another kind of life
in that hypothetical universe.

As an afterthought, I would like to add that our “finely-tuned” universe is
almost entirely hostile to life. Is this really the best god could do? Give us
a fragile planet with extremely limited resources, teeming with organisms
trying to kill us (including organisms _invisible_ to us), with vast swaths of
the land uninhabitable to humans much of the time? Actually, the majority of
the planet is not ideal for humans. And even where it is hospitable, we’re
still plagued by earthquakes, disease, and other forms of natural evil. We
have to build shelters _from_ our finely tuned environment!

If you rigidly and arbitrarily define ‘life’ as strictly _human_ life, then we
indeed have a fine-tuning problem. However, if you define life more broadly —
in terms of consciousness, information processing, etc. — there is not much
reason to think we have a fine tuning problem at all. Let’s say those finely
tuned parameters of nature were different: why couldn’t some other form of
conscious being emerge from that different universe? As Sean Carroll puts it,

As Christopher Hitchens was fond of pointing out, even if I accept the Fine
Tuning Argument from start to finish, it doesn’t get you to Christianity, and
certainly not your favorite version of it. It doesn’t even get you to theism,
let alone one particular version. Even if you find yourself convinced by the
apologist’s dubious probability calculations, you cannot logically proceed
past deism. This point is not hypothetical — _ISIS_ uses the Fine Tuning
Argument. I read an article in the Islamic State’s very own publication,
formerly known as _Dabiq_ , where they trot out, word for word, the
teleological reasoning that I’m used to hearing from Christian apologists.

_“The only framework in which you can honestly say that the physical
parameters of the universe must take on certain values in order for life to
exist is naturalism.”_

If you’ve never seen the debate in which Sean Carroll debunks the standard
Christian apologetics based on pseudophysics, including the Fine Tuning
Argument, do yourself a huge favor:
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wqKObSeim2w](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wqKObSeim2w)

_“It is certainly true that if you change the parameters of nature, our local
conditions that we observe around us would change by a lot. … I do not grant
that therefore, life could not exist. I will start granting that once someone
tells me the conditions under which life can exist. What is the definition of
life, for example? If it’s just information processing, thinking, something
like that — there’s a huge panoply of possibilities.”_

This is to say nothing of our own bodies, where our appendices burst and our
teeth can kill us. We reach sexual maturity before reaching cognitive
maturity, we eat and breathe with the same hole, and our eyes, spines, and
joints go bad more often than not. I’m not sure why _I_ can think of
improvements for our environment and bodies that an omniscient and omnipotent
god apparently failed to imagine.

Most of this is based on the work of physicist Sean Carroll, author of one of
my favorite books of all time, _The Big Picture: On the Origins of Life,
Meaning, and the Universe Itself_. His work is fantastic and I highly
recommend you check out his books and debates on YouTube linked below.

If you’re a theist, you are probably not a materialist. You probably believe
that human beings possess an animating soul, which is what we _really_ are. If
you’re a naturalist like me, you believe that consciousness is purely
information processing performed by the physical arrangement of atoms in the
brain. There is no extra, immaterial ’stuff’ pushing around chemicals in the
brain. This being clarified, why on earth does god need to fine tune anything
physical for life to exist? I thought consciousness was non-physical? If I
have an immaterial soul, it should be able to exist regardless of the
properties of the physical, material world.

According to theism, conscious life is partly non-physical. So why do the
physical, material parameters of nature need to hold certain values for our
non-physical, immaterial souls to exist?

> “The present inability of science to explain consciousness plays no role
> whatsoever in the argument. What’s doing the work in the argument is the
> fact that theism . . . entails that consciousness exists, whereas naturalism
> has no such entailment.”

As I mentioned, about nineteen out of twenty people believe in God. Now,
imagine we designed a computer program that could solve advanced problems of
some nature or another. It was experimental technology and it wasn’t perfect,
but it produced the right answer more often than not – far greater than
chance. (I.e., it was generally truth-tracking in the appropriate domain.) Say
we asked twenty computers the same question, and nineteen of them produced the
same answer. Clearly, this would be strong evidence in favor of one answer
over the other. It’s not _impossible_ that the one is right and the nineteen
are wrong, but the odds are against it.

As it turns out, the majority of philosophers _of religion_ are theists. So
the subgroup of philosophers with the most plausible claim to relevant
expertise _are_ mostly theists. Perhaps selection pressure could explain why
most philosophers of religion are theists – atheists are probably less
inclined to study something they don’t think is real in the first place. While
this is plausible, it doesn’t bear much on the argument. My argument is not an
appeal to the consensus of experts. It’s an appeal to widespread acceptance
among all human beings, past and present.

  2. Pingback: [CA96 Debunking Myself on God (pt. 1) | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/06/09/ca96-debunking-myself-on-god-pt-1/)

Those who experience God are rational in believing in him. In the ordinary
experiential states of seeing, feeling, hearing, etc. we naturally form
beliefs about the external world. These beliefs are appropriately grounded in
experience. If it seems to you that you’re seeing an object, or for that
matter a person, then in the absence of any defeaters, you have some
justification for believing that there really is an object, person, etc. –
it’s entirely rational for you to believe so.

Natural selection has no influence over laws of nature, and psychophysical
laws are a subset of natural laws. Just as natural selection can’t affect laws
of gravity, it can’t affect psychophysical laws. This isn’t to undermine
evolutionary explanations in biology – only to say that laws of nature are
ontologically prior, as it were, to natural selection. This argument is about
fortunately tuned natural laws, which conceivably could have been quite
different. A hypothesis of indifference leaves us completely in the dark as to
what explains our good fortune. Whereas, the hypothesis that there’s a
perfectly loving, omnipotent designer of nature makes quick work of this
problem.

Today, we are interested in discussing some of the arguments that make belief
in God reasonable or unreasonable. In my opening, I am going to present four
arguments which I think make it reasonable to believe that God exists.

The problem with Oppy’s response here is that the claim has not, nor has it
ever been, that religious experiences improve your performance on “standard
reasoning and inference tasks.” The claim is that those who experience these
unusual states of consciousness are seeing things that we don’t ordinarily
see, and appreciating truths that ordinarily escape us. They don’t improve
your SAT score. Our senses and immediate experiences provide a path to truth –
one which is quite different from logical inference. Our sense data and
experiences put us in touch with reality as well, and it’s possible that these
non-ordinary states of consciousness are causing us to see and understand in a
similar way.

> “There are many conditions that predispose towards ‘mystical’ experience: .
> . . ingestion of ‘mind-altering’ drugs – mescaline, psilocybin; bodily
> insult – starvation, mortification, extreme exercise, extreme sexual
> activity, near-death experience; ‘rhythmical’ activities – meditation,
> prayer, trance, music, dance, chant; and so forth. These conditions are not
> noted for their cognitive reliability in other domains . . . [They] are not
> positively correlated with performance on standard reasoning and inference
> tasks. Indeed, [they] are all very strongly negatively correlated with
> performance on standard reasoning and inference tasks.”

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F05%2F29%2Fdoes-god-exist-transcript-of-opening-statement%2F&signup_flow=account)

> “As the human intellect, though weak, is not essentially perverted, there is
> a certain presumption of the truth of any opinion held by many human minds,
> requiring to be rebutted by assigning some other real or possible cause for
> its prevalence.”
>
> J.S. Mill

Can our hyperactive agency detection device (HADD) explain religious
experiences? Allow me to concede that HADD can explain _some_ religious
experiences. However, it is implausible to maintain that _all_ religious
experiences can be explained via HADD, since it’s only a subset of religious
experiences that don’t go beyond mere agency detection. Furthermore, our
agency detection doesn’t _always_ misfire. It’s accurate more often than not.
Perhaps it’s misfiring when we experience God, but perhaps it’s not: it could
be working just as it’s designed to work.

> Phenomenal Conservatism: If it seems to S that P, then, in the absence of
> defeaters, S thereby has at least some justification for believing that P
> (Huemer 2007).

> “Mystical states, when well developed, usually are, and have the right to
> be, absolutely authoritative over the individuals to whom they come. . . .
> Our own more ‘rational’ beliefs are based on evidence exactly similar in
> nature to that which mystics quote for theirs. Our senses, namely, have
> assured us of certain states of fact; but mystical experiences are as direct
> perceptions of fact for those who have them as any sensations ever were for
> us. The records show that even though the five senses be in abeyance in
> them, they are absolutely sensational in their epistemological quality . . .
> Yet, I repeat once more, the existence of mystical states absolutely
> overthrows the pretension of non-mystical states to be the sole and ultimate
> dictators of what we may believe. . . . It is the rationalistic critic
> rather who plays the part of denier in the controversy, and his denials have
> no strength, for there never can be a state of facts to which new meaning
> may not truthfully be added, provided the mind ascend to a more enveloping
> point of view. It must always remain an open question whether mystical
> states may not possibly be such superior points of view, windows through
> which the mind looks out upon a more extensive and inclusive world. The
> difference of the views seen from the different mystical windows need not
> prevent us from entertaining this supposition. The wider world would in that
> case prove to have a mixed constitution like that of this world, that is
> all.”

Maybe we won the cosmic lottery, but theism can offer a better explanation
than that.

If human cognitive faculties, which are generally truth-tracking,
overwhelmingly produce the same conclusion, that fact does provide defeasible
evidential support for that conclusion.

Belief in God was produced by generally truck-tracking human faculties far
more often than it wasn’t. Furthermore, its likelihood is raised as a simple
matter of probability, since most of the beliefs that are held by most people
are true.

In summary, then, we’ve seen four respects in which theism provides a better
explanation of the world than naturalism. If my opponent is to persuade us
otherwise, he must first tear down all of the reasons that I have presented
and then in their place erect a case of his own to show the opposite. Unless
and until he does that, I think we should readily concede that belief in God
is reasonable.

> “[Ad populum] is the ‘fallacy’ of believing something because most people
> believe it. But what exactly is supposed to be wrong with that? . . . Maybe
> the idea is that most people believing p is _irrelevant_ to whether p is
> true. I.e., if most people believe it, that doesn’t mean it is more likely
> to be correct. Problem: This is obviously wrong. If most people believe
> something, that obviously _does_ make it more likely to be correct than if
> most people don’t believe it. If most of our beliefs weren’t true, the human
> species would die out pretty much immediately. Sometimes, people elaborate
> on this ‘fallacy’ by citing examples of beliefs that were once widely held
> but were false – e.g., that the sun orbits the Earth. So let me now just
> mention a few typical examples of beliefs that are widely held: Dogs exist.
> It’s generally lighter in the daytime than at night. The sky is blue, not
> red, green, or yellow. There are more than three human beings in existence.
> Human beings commonly have beliefs and desires. Putting your hand in a fire
> hurts. Six is more than two. The Earth has existed for more than five
> minutes. When you drop rocks near the surface of the Earth, they generally
> fall. . . . I’m sure you can extend that list for a long time. Now, which
> would you say there are more of: Widely-held beliefs that are true, or ones
> that are false?”

Thank you for having me. I count it a privilege to be exercising my emotional
and intellectual empathy with theists. I think that’s a great value of these
devil’s advocate debates. I hope Kyle and I, as well as everyone watching, can
walk away with a deeper understanding of theism and atheism.

Though we’ve touched on them already, let’s address two common objections to
psychophysical harmony:

_I recently participated in a “devil’s advocate” debate on God’s existence. I
defended theism, and my opponent, Christian Idealism, defended naturalism.
Below is the transcript of my expanded opening statement. There were a few
paragraphs which were saved for the rebuttal segment, but they’ve been
included here._

One might point out that there’s an inverse correlation between education and
religiosity. But the question here is one of _relevant_ expertise. I don’t
particularly care what climate scientists think about philosophy of mind or
what economists think about photography. If someone has some nondescript
degree, why would that make them an epistemic authority on God?

The concept of God is deeply embedded in the human psyche. Human faculties
overwhelmingly tend to produce belief in something Godlike, just as they
overwhelmingly tend to produce a belief in the external world, other minds,
induction, and a laundry list of true beliefs so mundane we hardly notice
them. This is the case for the vast majority of the world’s population now and
throughout history.

This argument was developed by an atheist philosopher of religion, Jeff
Lowder. In his article, “An F-Inductive Argument from Consciousness for
Theism, Revisited” Lowder writes

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[argument from
consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-from-
consciousness/), [arguments for
god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments-for-god/),
[arguments for theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments-
for-theism/), [atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[common consent argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/common-
consent-argument/),
[consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [devil's advocate debate
god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/devils-advocate-debate-god/),
[devil's advocate debate
theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/devils-advocate-debate-
theism/), [fine tuning](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fine-
tuning/), [god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/),
[psychophysical](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/psychophysical/),
[psychophysical
harmony](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/psychophysical-harmony/),
[Religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religion/), [religious
experience](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religious-experience/),
[theist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/theist/), [tiddy
smith](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/tiddy-smith/), [widespread
theistic belief](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/widespread-
theistic-belief/)

> “Various instances of psychophysical harmony have been emphasized in recent
> work by Adam Pautz (2020), David Chalmers (2018), Philip Goff (2018), Hedda
> Hassel Mørch (2017, 2020), Harold Langsam (2011), Noa Latham (2000), and
> Bradford Saad (2019).”
>
> Dustin Crummett & Brian Cutter

I think the arguments for and against God are cumulative. This is the case for
any scientific or historical theory. We don’t produce just one piece of
evidence for our hypothesis; we produce many pieces of evidence which together
make the hypothesis probable. I’m going to offer four lines of evidence that
we are more likely to observe in a theistic world than an atheistic world.

Can neuroscience explain religious experiences? Skeptics will sometimes appeal
to neural correlates of religious experiences, pointing out, with varying
degrees of specificity, that the brain is active while these religious
experiences take place. What seems implicit here is the following line of
reasoning: because these experiences were chemically mediated, they can’t be
trusted. That’s obviously wrong, because all of your experiences are
chemically mediated. Yes, there are neural correlates to religious experience.
But presenting the neural correlates of a perceived tree does not imply the
tree is a hallucination. All of your thoughts, everything that you think,
every line of reasoning that you follow, all sense data that come in – all of
your experiences are neurologically mediated, in _some_ sense. And certainly
some of those experiences have epistemic credibility! The argument that
neurologically mediated states of consciousness cannot be truth-tracking is
not just incorrect – it’s self-defeating. Your thought that providing the
neural basis of religious experience would debunk those experiences is also
chemically mediated and can also be described neurologically! So appeals to
neuroscience of this sort are nonsensical and self-defeating.

In _The Varieties of Religious Experience,_ William James exposes an epistemic
double standard held among many skeptics:

To elaborate, let me borrow an illustration from Paul Draper. Say we have two
jars of jelly beans. One is filled with mostly red beans and a small number of
blue beans, and the other is filled with mostly blue beans and a small number
of red beans. Both jars also contain an equal number of yellow beans. Someone
takes a handful of beans from one of the jars. We don’t know which. We have
several red beans, a few blue beans, and a few yellow beans. So the evidence
in this case is _compatible_ with the beans coming from either jar, but it’s
surprising on the assumption that they came out of the second jar and
unsurprising on the assumption that they came out of the first. So how many
red beans, yellow beans, and blue beans have we drawn?

First, what do I mean by God? I’ll be defending bare philosophical theism, but
nonetheless something approximating the traditional view of God worshiped by
many Christians, Muslims, Jews, and others: a necessary, perfectly loving,
morally perfect, conscious, personal being (person in the sense that he’s
someone with whom we interact) of infinite power at the foundation of reality.
(Due to time constraints, we won’t be able to explore different models of God.
Suffice to say we could make some alterations to these divine attributes while
remaining in the ballpark of perfect being theism.)

Conscious beings did not have to have the exact nature that we have. Since God
has reason to design the psychophysical laws in order to bring about the
values realized by consciousness and by psychophysical harmony, theism makes
harmony much more likely than it would otherwise be. Certainly more likely
than it would be on a hypothesis of indifference, wherein fundamental reality
has no tendency to realize value or disvalue.

With that in mind, I’m going to offer four lines of evidence that make theism
more likely than it otherwise would have been:

Here’s a different objection to arguments from religious experience, offered
by Graham Oppy (2013).

On whether we are naturally disposed to believe in God, or whether we’re
indoctrinated or otherwise taught to believe in God, I would point to the
“Cognition, Religion and Theology Project” led by Dr. Justin Barrett, from the
Centre for Anthropology and Mind at Oxford University: “A three-year
international research project, directed by two academics at the University of
Oxford, finds that humans have natural tendencies to believe in gods and an
afterlife.” The roughly two million dollar project “involved 57 researchers
who conducted over 40 separate studies in 20 countries representing a diverse
range of cultures. The studies (both analytical and empirical) conclude that
humans are predisposed to believe in gods and an afterlife, and that both
theology and atheism are reasoned responses to what is a basic impulse of the
human mind. The researchers point out that the project was not setting out to
prove the existence of god or otherwise, but sought to find out whether
concepts such as gods and an afterlife appear to be entirely taught or basic
expressions of human nature.” There may be religious disagreement about
precisely what’s there, but something Godlike is a point of agreement. (Given
a plausible soteriological scheme, I think the evidential weight of religious
diversity, discord, confusion, disagreement, etc. is seriously diminished.)

About nineteen out of twenty people believe in God. If nineteen out of twenty
people in the room see something, and you don’t, what makes you think it’s
everyone else who’s missing something? We can surely admit that our faculties
are fallible but generally trustworthy. It should give the atheist pause when
they realize that they’re in the minority here. Humility should be the
watchword. And yet, “humility” is not the word that springs to mind after even
a few minutes with the atheist and skeptic community online. If God is a
delusion, why isn’t it like other delusions? Why isn’t theism like flat earth?
Flat earth doesn’t have the same widespread acceptance or intellectual
pedigree as theism.

What about the consensus of experts? If common sense led most people to
Conclusion A, but those with relevant expertise, upon intense study, came to
Conclusion B, that fact would provide a defeater for the support initially
offered by widespread acceptance. So, who are the epistemic authorities here?

The multiverse, anthropic principle, observer selection effect, etc. could not
explain psychophysical harmony, since observers could find themselves in
disharmonious universes. While it’s true that observers could not find
themselves in non-life-permitting universes, observers could find themselves
in disharmonious universes. Needless to say, you would not want to be one of
these unlucky observers. And that’s a key point for the argument: we are
_fortunate_ to not be one of these observers. Not _just_ because disharmony
would be bad for conscious creatures, but because the number of
disharmoniously tuned universes is vastly greater than the number of
harmonious universes.

Let’s move away from religious experience to the more mundane area of memory.
Imagine you are accused of a crime on the basis of very convincing evidence,
but you know that you didn’t do it on the basis of your memory. For you, the
immediate evidence of your memory is not defeated by the public evidence
against you. Of course, this won’t do much to convince others who don’t have
access to your mnemonic (memory) seemings. Even though the publicly available
evidence is the same for everyone, they may be rational in believing you did
it, and you’re rational in believing you didn’t do it. You occupy different
positions on the grand epistemic landscape. Contrary evidence may be strong
enough to persuade you that your experiences are deceiving you, but that would
require overwhelming contrary evidence.

There are many arguments from consciousness, but this one is incredibly
simple. Here’s the observation: Consciousness exists. (Or, alternatively:
There is at least one conscious agent.) Now, it’s a trivial point that an
observation is evidence favoring one hypothesis over another if one of our two
hypotheses assigns a bigger probability to that observation than the other.
Since God is a conscious being, theism entails the existence of consciousness:
the probability assigned to “Consciousness exists” is 1. Atheism plainly does
not entail that consciousness exists (neither does naturalism or the
hypothesis of indifference). Thus, theism assigns a higher probability to the
existence of consciousness than its rivals, from which it follows that our
observation – “Consciousness exists” – is evidence favoring theism over
naturalism.

The argument from psychophysical harmony can be considered a fine-tuning
argument focused on consciousness. In recent years, philosophers of mind have
been puzzled to notice strikingly harmonious relations between conscious
states and physical states, and conscious states with one another. Our nature
as conscious beings is partially or wholly dependent on laws of nature – laws
which conceivably could have varied in dramatic ways. So, our nature as
conscious beings conceivably could have been dramatically different in
innumerable disharmonious ways. (For example, we can imagine terrible
pain/pleasure inversion scenarios, or more hedonically neutral scenarios that
we are nonetheless fortunate to have avoided.) What’s striking is that a given
functional role has been correlated with a subjective experience that
rationalizes, justifies, or otherwise makes sense of that functional role.
Presumably, the causal skeleton of the world could have remained in place,
thus making no difference to natural selection, while altering the
psychophysical laws such that the physical, functional states correlated with
phenomenal states that did not rationalize, justify, or otherwise make sense
of that behavior. In other words, the external, physical world could have
remained fixed while the internal, phenomenal world could have been chaotic or
even hellish as a consequence of the altered, non-finely tuned psychophysical
laws.

Of the beliefs that are held by most people, most of them are true. They’re
just so mundane that we typically don’t notice them. So the fact that most
people throughout history and in the present believe in God _does_ make God’s
existence more probable than it otherwise would have been. For one, it was
produced by generally truck-tracking faculties far more often than it wasn’t;
and second, its likelihood is raised as a simple matter of probability, since
most of the beliefs that are held by most people are true.

By “evidence,” I mean that which makes a hypothesis more probable than it
otherwise would have been. The arguments I’ll offer take the following general
form: an observation strongly favors theism over atheism if theism assigns to
that observation a probability that is bigger than the probability that
atheism assigns to that observation. I.e., Pr(O|Theism) > Pr(O|Atheism). Of
course, atheists can explain the data to which I’ve appealed. Nevertheless,
theism assigns a higher probability to these observations than atheism. The
fact that we can all explain the data if we put our minds to it doesn’t change
the basic judgment that certain observations are more likely on theism than on
atheism.

It’s perhaps worth noting that most of the philosophers who have brought this
problem of harmony to the fore are not theists. They have no hidden theistic
agenda. In fact, some of them are outspoken atheists. Interestingly, some of
these secular philosophers have noted that a benevolent God could solve this
problem, since God would have the power to alter the natural laws and would
have a motivation to design laws that brought about valuable things, such as
consciousness and psychophysical harmony. Theism has a unique advantage over
atheism in its ability to predict valuable states of affairs. An indifferent
universe doesn’t care if it brings about valuable or disvaluable things!

  1. Pingback: [Does God Exist? Devil’s Advocate Debate | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/06/01/does-god-exist-devils-advocate-debate/)

Many atheists and skeptics would be quick to reply that this argument commits
a blatant “appeal to popularity” fallacy. “Just because a belief is widely
accepted doesn’t necessarily mean it’s true!” When stated that way, it’s
obviously correct: popularity isn’t conclusive proof for a proposition. (I
don’t know if anyone has ever said that it is.) What I’m claiming is that
widespread acceptance provides inductive support for a proposition. Why?
Because our cognitive faculties are generally truth-tracking, and because most
of our beliefs are true. To quote epistemologist Michael Huemer,

One might point out that there’s an inverse correlation between education _in
philosophy_ and religiosity. The majority of philosophers do not believe in
God. But again, the question is one of _relevant_ expertise. Why should we
place any particular emphasis on what philosophers of language think about
God? Furthermore, as Quentin Smith noted in his article The Metaphilosophy of
Naturalism, “the great majority of naturalist philosophers have an unjustified
belief that naturalism is true and an unjustified belief that theism (or
supernaturalism) is false.” Smith, a leading atheist philosopher himself,
believed that his academic peers were only “accidentally” right.

  3. Pingback: [CA97 Widespread Theistic Belief & Religious Disagreement (Devil’s Advocate pt. 2) | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/06/12/ca97-widespread-theistic-belief-religious-disagreement-devils-advocate-pt-2/)

Even though atheists can provide a good case for their position, unless it
meets a very high bar, it won’t do much to persuade those who have had the
experience of God. Nor should it.

                  1. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fa6212456ab617d2fc0898136bec5d0d?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **[SelfAwarePatterns](http://selfawarepatterns.com)** says:

_Epiphenomenalism_ is the view that consciousness has no physical effects.
Mental events are superfluous to the physical activity in the brain –
experiences have _no effect_ on physical events or on one another.
Epiphenomenalists take the physical realm to be causally closed: every
physical event involved in human behavior and brain functioning has a
sufficient causal explanation in terms of prior physical events. Mental events
exert no causal influence whatsoever.

> …why is pain correlated with stimuli detrimental to survival and
> reproduction – such as suffocation, hunger and burning? And why is pleasure
> correlated with stimuli beneficial to survival and reproduction – such as
> eating and breathing? According to the argument, the fact that we have these
> particular correlations and not other ones must have an evolutionary
> explanation. But given epiphenomenalism, differences in phenomenal
> properties could not cause differences in fitness, so natural selection
> would not be expected to favor these correlations over any other ones.
> Epiphenomenalism thus renders these correlations an inexplicable
> coincidence, and should therefore be rejected.

I hope I won’t try your patience here, and absolutely no worries if you prefer
to move on. But how would you define “qualitative” in this context? To me,
that’s one of those synonyms I expressed concern about above. I’ll give you my
(reductive) answer. I think they’re categorizing conclusions, along with the
blizzard of associated dispositions and predictions that fire when a stimulus
comes in. I’m guessing you don’t think that covers it. But my question is,
what’s missing?

                1. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7f39ae39f9d5474ff470611ad3b4e691?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **Alex Popescu** says:

What’s the difference? The idea is that all (extrinsic) definitions are in
some sense relational, you might ask “what is x” and I will point to some
aspect of y. In turn you can ask “what is y” etc… It seems like we need some
intrinsic component of either x and/or y if we are to truly understand the
meaning of the terms, otherwise we’ll just keep going around in circles. So
phenomenal states are different from physical states because they are
intrinsically graspable, meaning that one doesn’t need to define a quale in
terms of some other thing to understand what it is. One can achieve
understanding just by being immediately acquainted with it. For example, it
seems like you can know or be acquainted with what phenomenal ‘red’ is like
just by experiencing it. You don’t need to have an understanding of other
phenomenal colors or of the concept of color in order to understand this. Yet,
it seems like the physical concept of red (the wavelength) can’t be understand
unless defined in terms of other colors/wavelengths.

I wasn’t familiar with Schwitzgebel’s take on phenomenality, but I just read
through his paper on the subject and was unimpressed. It seems to me he’s
basically stripped everything away from ‘phenomenality’ that defines the
concept (“I swear it’s a car, but it doesn’t have a power supply, wheels, or
steering etc…). So, he hasn’t avoided Frankish’s horn at all, which he readily
concedes in fact. He just adds a ‘wonderfulness’ criterion, but all that does
it make it more epistemically difficult to achieve reduction to the horn 2
position (reduction is not ‘obvious’), but it doesn’t actually avoid the logic
of Frankish’s argument.

I think all functional/dispositional/physical definitions of
qualia/phenomenality, including yours, will be insufficient yes. That’s not to
say that qualitative experiences can’t be functional/categorical, just that
the functional definition won’t capture its essence. Personally, I think I
would define qualia/phenomenality as being intrinsic. They are not meant to be
captured under any extrinsic definition like a functional one.

The term “quasi-qualia” is a misnomer since it implies that some kind of
qualia still remain. Another term that Frankish uses as a synonym is “zero
qualia”, which I think gets the point across much clearer. Contrast with the
weak illusionists’ “diet qualia” which is much more like what you are talking
about (where we are having some phenomenal experience that is being grossly
misinterpreted).

I’m sure from your viewpoint, you’ll see this as me just evoking an illusion.
In truth, although I dislike the label “illusion”, ontologically I agree with
the illusionists.

This is an abductive argument: an inference to the best explanation. What
needs explaining is the fact that pain is generally correlated with stimuli
detrimental to survival and reproduction, while pleasure is generally
correlated with stimuli beneficial to survival and reproduction. On
epiphenomenalism, there is no reason to expect _these_ correlations. In fact,
it is at least equally likely that maladaptive behavior would systematically
correlate with positive hedonic states. (For the record, these alternative
correlation schemes don’t have to be nightmarish pain/pleasure inversion
scenarios. The correlations could have been something hedonically neutral, but
still mismatching and disharmonious.) “Luck” is not a good explanation of the
systematic correlations we observe. I don’t think that the correlations are
the product of pure chance and good fortune, so I think epiphenomenalism is
false.

              2. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fa6212456ab617d2fc0898136bec5d0d?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **[SelfAwarePatterns](http://selfawarepatterns.com)** says:

He asserts that phenomenal consciousness doesn’t exist, but then is forced to
talk about the appearance of phenomenal properties, which he labels “pseudo-
phenomenal properties”, or “quasi-qualia”. But when it comes to phenomena, it
seems like the appearance is what we’re referring to. So the appearance of the
phenomena is the phenomena. Which means the appearance (or illusion) of
phenomenal consciousness is phenomenal consciousness.

In _The Principles of Psychology_ , William James offered an evolutionary
argument against epiphenomenalism:

Anyways, I am actually in agreement with you that yours and Frankish’s
position is mostly a definitional difference, but I actually think (no
offense) that you are on the wrong side of the semantic debate. To answer your
question, I am using the word ‘phenomenality’ to be inherently qualitatative,
and this is what makes it non-physical. You shouldn’t ‘reduce’ phenomenality
to strip it of qualitativeness (although of course you can) because this
defeats the entire point, meaning that it is supposed to be the word which
picks out the position staked out by Chalmer et al (Schwitzgebel’s take is
very much in the minority) This is not true of the word ‘appearance’ for
example, which is much more ambiguous. If you strip ‘phenomenality’ of this
meaning, then not only will you deprive yourself of the conceptual tools to
engage with the opposite side, but you will be doomed to talk past each other.
So don’t do that, just use the standard definitions as Frankish does and admit
that you think phenomenality doesn’t exist.

I’m pretty familiar with Frankish’s views. The difference between his view and
mine could be described as definitional. (Which I think describes a large
portion of philosophical differences.)

If you accept that the appearance is the reality of phenomenal consciousness,
then you accept that phenomenal experiences exist. It doesn’t matter that we
can be radically mistaken about the nature of our experiences (or that they
might have physical aspects in addition to their qualitative aspects), what’s
important is that you’ve admitted that we are having phenomenal experiences.
Once you admit this, you have to deny physicalism. The middle ground
physicalism which tries to accept some degree of phenomenality fails because
any kind of phenomenality, by definition, is qualitative (and the physical is
just about the quantitative).

No offense taken. I think my stance makes sense from a functional and
evolutionary take, but I can see the reasons why some may not agree.

What would you say are the differences between “phenomenal” and “appearance”?
Without using circular synonyms, what would you say “phenomenal” has that
“appearance” lacks? What prevents us from reducing the phenomenal in the same
way you reduced appearance?

So _if_ you think we could potentially explain the correlations we observe
through natural selection, you must reject epiphenomenalism. That’s a
precondition for invoking natural selection. If you strip consciousness of any
causal influence, there is no chance that an evolutionary explanation could do
any work for you.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F05%2F07%2Fwilliam-james-evolutionary-argument-against-epiphenomenalism%2F&signup_flow=account)

If epiphenomenalism is true, mental causation is an illusion. Even if pain and
pleasure were inverted, you’d continue behaving in exactly the same way you do
now, since our experiences play no causal role whatsoever. Even if your visual
field was composed of undifferentiated static, you’d verbally report seeing a
sunset. Even if you intend to raise your arm, you may raise your eyebrows.
Your conscious intentions have _nothing to do_ with determining your physical
behavior. This is counterintuitive, to say the least. It also leaves us
completely unable to explain why our experiences line up appropriately with
our behavior, _just as if_ experiences are motivating behavior. It sure seems
like I’m eating good food that’s beneficial to survival and avoiding rotten
meat because of tastes and smells and so forth in consciousness. Presumably,
natural selection made it so that I recoil at rotting meat and am drawn to
good-smelling food. Those experiences _motivate_ and _incentivize_ those
adaptive behaviors, we typically think. This is not the case for
epiphenomenalists. So how is it then that the correlations illustrated by
James evolved if experiences are invisible to natural selection?

The problem of course is that we’re speaking of consciousness, which is the
one thing we are supposed to be the surest of. Stripping consciousness from
your ontology is an epistemological death sentence, since qualitative
experiences are the closest thing we have to an epistemological foundation. We
(most of us at least) believe in scientific theories precisely because they
are the best explanations of our qualitative experiences etc. Without
consciousness it would be hard (impossible?) to justify any of our beliefs
about the external world.

For a related argument against epiphenomenalism, one that greatly expands on
this basic idea, check out [my interview with Dustin Crummett on
psychophysical harmony.](https://youtu.be/auahudU1C08)

Anyway, I agree with the ontology of the illusionist, but I think both they
and anti-physicalists frame the issue in an unproductive manner. As Frankish
himself admitted, Eric Schwitzgebel’s “innocent” description of phenomenal
consciousness is compatible with illusionism. I agree with Schwitzgebel that
what Frankish calls the “illusion”, I’m just going to call phenomenal.

> There is … [a] set of facts which seem explicable on the supposition that
> consciousness has causal efficacy. It is a well-known fact that pleasures
> are generally associated with beneficial, pains with detrimental,
> experiences. All the fundamental vital processes illustrate this law.
> Starvation, suffocation, privation of food, drink and sleep, work when
> exhausted, burns, wounds, inflammation, the effects of poison, are as
> disagreeable as filling the hungry stomach, enjoying rest and sleep after
> fatigue, exercise after rest, and a sound skin and unbroken bones at all
> times, are pleasant. [Some] have suggested that these coincidences are due,
> not to any pre-established harmony, but to the mere action of natural
> selection which would certainly kill off in the long-run any breed of
> creatures to whom the fundamentally noxious experience seemed enjoyable. An
> animal that should take pleasure in a feeling of suffocation would, if that
> pleasure were efficacious enough to make him immerse his head in water,
> enjoy a longevity of four or five minutes. But if pleasures and pains have
> no efficacy, one does not see … why the most noxious acts, such as burning,
> might not give thrills of delight, and the most necessary ones, such as
> breathing, cause agony.

Got it. I thought you were advocating for an eliminativist physicalist
position or something. That said, if you are advocating for a sort of middle
ground physicalism, there are good reasons to think this can’t exist. For
example, Keith Frankish argues that there is no middle ground. If we want to
say that consciousness is reducible to the physical then we just have to
accept that qualitative experiences don’t exist, period.

          1. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fa6212456ab617d2fc0898136bec5d0d?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **[SelfAwarePatterns](http://selfawarepatterns.com)** says:

Thanks for the extended explanation. I think everything you describe is true,
from a subjective point of view. It’s from the objective set of perspectives
that we can in fact reduce qualities. I often use the example of a software
bit. Within the dynamics of the software, a bit is a fundamental irreducible
concept. But at the hardware level, a bit is always implemented with some
piece of hardware, whether it be a transistor, vacuum tube, etc.

Imagine that pain and pleasure were inverted: behavior that usually brought
about painful experiences instead brought about pleasant experiences, and vice
versa. Poking yourself in the eye with a stick felt like quenching your
thirst. Eating a good meal felt like being burned. Adaptive behavior felt
excruciating, while maladaptive behavior was rewarding. To make matters worse,
you continue behaving in the same ways you ordinarily do in this nightmarish
world: you helplessly watch your own limbs move, as you go on doing things
that were agonizingly painful.

            1. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7f39ae39f9d5474ff470611ad3b4e691?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **Alex Popescu** says:

        1. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7f39ae39f9d5474ff470611ad3b4e691?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **Alex Popescu** says:

Whether the unit of natural selection is the gene, the individual, the group,
some combination thereof or something else entirely, selection is acting on
the physical behavior of natural processes. If epiphenomenalism is true,
consciousness has no influence over evolution for essentially the same reason
that other causally effete things – for instance, abstract objects like
numbers and triangles – have no influence over evolution. If conscious
experiences have no physical effects, they could not possibly cause
differences in genetic fitness.

It’s important to note that this conception of phenomenal consciousness is not
synonymous with representation. There are deflationary accounts of
representation for example, where a brain state represents x just in case it
participates in the right kind of causal relations with x. But the kind of
representation I have in mind only exists if the brain states ‘construct’ the
right kind of virtual model. This also means that Frankish, when describing
the appearance of consciousness as just being attributable to a faulty
representation in the brain, must thereby endorse a deflationary account of
representation. Under physicalism, everything, including your representational
account, must be fully describable in physical terms.

Having said that, how exactly would I define qualia if I were speaking to a
layperson? Typically, I define phenomenal consciousness as just being that
virtual model of the world which is constructed in or represented by our
brains. We all have a rich construction of how the world works, and this
richness or feeling-ness constitutes our conscious life. The problem of
physicalism just comes in because it seems like I could give a full physical
and/or functional description of my brain system, without ever describing
anything in my virtual model.

It seems like when we reach the point where we’re saying something has no
causal effects in the world, we’re trying too hard to keep it in our ontology.
For anyone who sees epiphenomenalism as tempting, they should probably take a
hard look at their commitment to dualism.

                    1. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7f39ae39f9d5474ff470611ad3b4e691?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **Alex Popescu** says:

              1. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7f39ae39f9d5474ff470611ad3b4e691?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **Alex Popescu** says:

This is also why I earlier mentioned how phenomenal states formed our
epistemological and semantical underpinnings. Without them, it appears that we
wouldn’t be able to understand what any terms actually mean, since we would
have no intrinsic referent. There is some controversy however over whether
this kind of relationism/structuralism can work or not, and whether it is
really true that we need intrinsicality as our foundation. Regardless of
whether that is true however, one can still believe in phenomenal
intrinsicality. You’re definitely not committed to the belief in the falsity
of structuralism/relationalism if you believe in phenomenal experiences. Also,
we can now better appreciate why the physical reduction program seems to be so
at odds with the concept of qualitativeness, since descriptions of physical
things seem to be inherently relational/dispositional.

I think the same is true for mental qualities. But we can’t reduce them from
the inside, because we lack the mechanisms to examine their underlying
dynamics. In this view, something being intrinsic is only intrinsic relative
to a particular point of view, of how much the model we’re using has been
abstracted away from the underlying reality. (At least above fundamental
physics.)

As an aside, I’ll mention that epiphenomenalists should seriously consider
becoming theists, since they’ve unintentionally brought about a good argument
for a benevolent designer. If epiphenomenalism is true, then we’re
exceptionally fortunate to find ourselves in a harmoniously tuned mental
world. A benevolent designer could explain our good fortune, but
epiphenomenalism on its own cannot. Even epiphenomenalism plus natural
selection cannot. So in the absence of some other hypothesis that makes the
valuable, harmonious correlations more likely, epiphenomenalism is
spectacularly implausible.

I don’t think removing dualism from your ontology means removing
consciousness. It does mean accepting that consciousness isn’t what it seems.
But that only means accepting what psychological research has been
demonstrating for decades, that introspection is an unreliable source of
information.

As I noted above, I think the right way to describe it is the appearance is
real, but the objective reality is far from obvious from the appearance. Some
people refer to that as illusionism too, but it’s a weaker form.

                    2. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fa6212456ab617d2fc0898136bec5d0d?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **[SelfAwarePatterns](http://selfawarepatterns.com)** says:

The impressive, systematic correlations between adaptive behavior and pleasure
(and maladaptive behavior and displeasure) on the epiphenomenalist view are
just a fortunate coincidence. Suffocation, starvation, burning, and so on are
correlated with unpleasant experiences; while eating, rest, and sex are
correlated with pleasure. If epiphenomenalism is true, it just as easily
could’ve been the other way around. Why? Because experiences are invisible to
natural selection. They play no role in motivating behavior, since they play
no causal role at all.

It’s an illusion in the sense of not being what it seems, but not in the sense
of not existing. But crucially, the “illusion” has evolutionary adaptive
benefits, so I think calling it an “illusion” implies a mistake of some kind,
and that feels misleading to me. (I might change my mind about this in the
future, but that’s my current take.)

The reason this hellish existence seems so far-fetched is that we ordinarily
take our experiences to have causal efficacy. Pain and pleasure often
_motivate_ what you do. The unpleasantness of hunger and the satisfaction of
eating a good meal are more than enough to incentivize the right actions. But
what if your mind had no causal influence over your behavior? What if your
feelings, experiences, sensations, and so on were completely superfluous to
the physical workings of your brain and body? Then the hellish world would be
possible. If epiphenomenalism is true, then mental causation is just an
illusion. Even if the experiences of pain and pleasure were inverted, you’d
behave in exactly the same way you do now.

Frankish is using the phrase appearance in an intrinsically non-phenomenal
sense. When Frankish says that it ‘appears’ that we are conscious, he only
means it in the sense that our brain has representational neural states which
are about (fictional) phenomenal states. He’s not saying that we are
phenomenally experiencing fictional qualitative experiences; that would indeed
be self-defeating. Anyways, Frankish is arguing against the exact kind of weak
illusionism that you espouse, and I agree with his arguments (although I take
the opposite stance from him).

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F05%2F04%2Fthe-argument-from-psychophysical-harmony-w-dustin-crummett%2F&signup_flow=account)

> This paper develops a new argument from consciousness to theism: the
> argument from psychophysical harmony. Roughly, psychophysical harmony
> consists in the fact that phenomenal states are correlated with physical
> states and with one another in strikingly fortunate ways. . . . we argue
> that psychophysical harmony is strong evidence for theism. Since God has
> reason to design the psychophysical laws in order to bring about the values
> realized by psychophysical harmony, theism makes harmony much more likely
> than it would otherwise be. . . . the argument still works if we accept (or
> we are open to) alternative views about consciousness, such as dualist
> interactionism, physicalism, idealism, or Russellian monism.

I was recently [joined by Dr. Dustin Crummett to discuss a new argument from
consciousness](https://youtu.be/auahudU1C08) for theism. (Though
psychophysical harmony _is_ evidence for theism, it may be equally good
evidence for non-theistic hypotheses that I find interesting, like axiarchism
and natural teleology.) This is from the introduction of[ the
paper](https://philarchive.org/rec/CUTPHA):

Some naturalists seem to think that “naturalism” must mean “physicalism,” but
I don’t think that’s quite right, since we already have a word for
physicalism. And even if we agree that “the natural” is exhausted by “the
physical,” “the physical” is similarly elusive and indeterminate. Like the
term theism, physicalism and naturalism immediately run into the issue of
defining “physical” and “nature,” questions which are only slightly less
contentious than the nature of God.

As Oppy explained earlier, naturalism entails atheism. Though some atheists
are not naturalists, the two ideas are intimately connected. There is a
tradition of atheistic anti-physicalism, and I thought it’d be worth naming a
few names: Thomas Nagel, Noam Chomsky, David Chalmers, Philip Goff, Peter
Sjöstedt-Hughes, Bertrand Russell, Nietzsche, and Schopenhauer, to list a few.

> “Naturalism is not physicalism or materialism, and naturalization does not
> require physicalization or physical reduction.”
>
> Jaegwon Kim

Some version of the “use” approach also seems to provide yet another path for
elaborating a version of naturalism, or can at least helpfully supplement
one’s efforts (which is how I’m more inclined to use it). So, if you’ve been
keeping track, the naturalist has several potential options for fleshing out
naturalism, beginning with a rather straightforward and uncomplicated
definition

There are, as you’re no doubt aware, quite different ways of fleshing out
naturalism. One could go with Strawson in saying that there is only the
natural world, the natural world is exhausted by the physical, science
uncovers the behavior of the physical, but the concrete nature of the physical
is wholly non-experiential. That would be a more ordinary conception of
physicalism.

While some naturalists like Daniel Dennett think that phenomenal consciousness
doesn’t exist in the natural world, it’s absurdly narrow to exclude realists
about phenomenal consciousness from the naturalist camp. What _is_ the natural
world, anyway? That issue is far from settled. A specific hypothesis or set of
hypotheses about what the natural world consists of should not get to lay
exclusive claim to naturalism. Drawing a line in the sand when it comes to
consciousness seems especially absurd.

He goes on to explain that “the physical” is experiential in its intrinsic
character ( _experience_ in the sense that any conscious creature is familiar
with by virtue of being a conscious creature). According to Strawson, physics
is quite abstract. It tells us about the structure and behavior of the
physical, but it doesn’t tell us anything one way or the other about the
concrete stuff that exemplifies the abstract, structural, behavioral
description provided by physical science. Our mathematical physical models
could be describing concrete non-experiential reality, but they could also be
describing concrete experiential reality, of the kind with which we’re
directly familiar.

> “Naturalism is a philosophy according to which there is only one world — the
> natural world, which exhibits unbroken patterns (the laws of nature), and
> which we can learn about through hypothesis testing and observation. In
> particular, there is no supernatural world — no gods, no spirits, no
> transcendent meanings.
>
> I like to talk about a particular approach to naturalism, which can be
> thought of as Poetic. By that I mean to emphasize that, while there is only
> one world, there are many ways of talking about the world. “Ways of talking”
> shouldn’t be underestimated; they can otherwise be labeled “theories” or
> “models” or “vocabularies” or “stories,” and if a particular way of talking
> turns out to be sufficiently accurate and useful, the elements in its
> corresponding vocabulary deserve to be called real.”
>
> Sean Carroll

> Languages and linguistic entities are not bloodless abstract objects that
> can be studied like specimens under a microscope. Rather, language takes the
> form of behavior, activity—specifically social practice. Sentences do not
> have lives of their own. The things we write on blackboards, and the alleged
> “propositions” they express, are fairly violent abstractions from the
> utterings performed by human beings in real-world contexts on particular
> occasions. […] Expressions…are noises we make that have socially defined
> functional roles; there are appropriate occasions for using them,
> inappropriate occasions for using them, and appropriate responses. When we
> talk of their meanings, we mean the functions they characteristically
> perform in the context of our current social practices.
>
> William Lycan

> “By ‘naturalism’ I mean the view that the world contains a single basic type
> of stuff, whose behavior is governed by a single set of simple, general
> laws, and that these laws are those revealed by science. The most common
> version of naturalism among contemporary philosophers is physicalism, the
> view that the world is entirely made up of matter, and matter is
> exhaustively described by physics. But some philosophers reject physicalism,
> even while accepting naturalism, holding that matter is not exhaustively
> described by physics—there are fundamental aspects of matter that physics is
> blind to. In particular (they tend to say), there are certain things each of
> us can know about matter, such as that one particular portion of matter (the
> one between our ears) sometimes feels and thinks and experiences, which go
> beyond both what physics itself says and what can be deduced from any
> physical description, no matter how detailed. Because facts about my
> consciousness are left out by any purely physical descriptions, these
> ‘naturalistic anti-physicalists’ infer that consciousness must be itself a
> fundamental feature of reality, no more derivable from physical properties
> than mass is derivable from charge.”
>
> Luke Roelofs

Debates between theists and atheists often don’t tread on territory beyond “Is
there an omnipotent, omniscient, maximally good designer of the natural
world?” (By the way, even this goes beyond the mere statement “God exists.”
Those are particular ideas about the nature of God.) I’m sure the point I’ve
been making throughout is not lost on you: there’s a kind of parity between
naturalism and theism. If theism is an acceptable term, then so is naturalism.
If theism is not meaningless, then neither is naturalism. If it’s acceptable
to define theism as “God exists,” then it’s acceptable to define naturalism as
“There is only the natural world.”

Naturalists, according to David Papinau, author of the Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy entry on naturalism, believe “that reality is exhausted by
nature, containing nothing ‘supernatural’.” Naturalism “has no very precise
meaning in contemporary philosophy” beyond this, along with an emphasis on
science as a means to understand the natural world.

I think most people have some sense of what counts as a natural thing and what
counts as a supernatural thing—they have an idea of when to use the word
“natural” and when it would seem inappropriate (rocks and electrons are
obviously not supernatural). So if meaning is use, then “natural” is
meaningful. From this point, we can go on to say a natural-ist is one who
believes in only natural things (there are none but natural causes, reality is
exhausted by nature, and so on).

Earlier, Oppy said that his minimal conception of naturalism “relies on a
prior understanding of the distinction between the natural and the
supernatural.” I don’t know much about philosophy of language, but lately I’ve
found myself increasingly sympathetic to claims like, “If we know how to _use_
the term, it has meaning,” and “Providing necessary and sufficient conditions
for naturalism (i.e., providing a foolproof definition) isn’t required for the
term to be meaningful, since that’s not how words and meaning actually work.”
It’s certainly nice to have clear necessary and sufficient conditions that
admit of no counterexamples or borderline cases, but this actually isn’t
needed for a concept to be meaningful.

So, naturalism is the view that there is only the natural world—reality is
exhausted by nature. (But what is the natural world? That’s the real
question.) The term “naturalism” is a bit like the term “theism.” It’s not
meaningless, but it’s not terribly informative. To put it mildly, theists
disagree with one another about the nature of God. Does that mean theism is a
meaningless term that should be discarded? No, it just means “theism” is a
more general term. Joseph Smith, the prophet Muhammed, Billy Graham, and
Deepak Chopra are all theists. They all subscribe to “theism.” Why can’t
naturalism be a similarly big tent?

So, my conception of a naturalist is simply one who believes in only the
natural world, that there are none but natural causes, that reality is
exhausted by nature, etc. However, if you lead with that, everyone’s brain
will short-circuit, since you used the word “natural” in the definition of
“naturalism.” This is an irritating tendency, since no one has a serious
problem with words like “theism,” which is equivalent to “God-ism.” If you
don’t have a problem with the term “theism,” I can’t imagine what your problem
would be with “naturalism.” Naturalism is the beginning of the story, not the
end. If you’re a naturalist, you have more work to do in order to flesh out
your worldview. Just like “theism,” it’s only the beginning of the story.

Use theory (or at least, my limited and crude understanding of use theory) is
not essential to my main contentions about naturalism. I’m attempting to
substantiate how one might have, as Oppy put it, “a prior understanding of the
distinction between the natural and the supernatural,” which is relevant,
since “all naturalists suppose that there are no supernatural causal
properties.”

So you’re a theist. God exists, but what do you mean by “God”? Are you a
polytheist, a pantheist, a Mormon, a Catholic? Theists disagree on the nature
of God. Similarly, naturalists disagree on the question “What is the natural
world?” and “What is meant by ‘natural’?” Though, our disagreements haven’t
(yet) led to bloodshed.

Philosopher of religion Graham Oppy, in his book _The Best Argument Against
God_ , provides another useful definition:

If naturalism is the view that there is only the natural world, that leads to
the question, “What is the natural world?” Here’s how philosopher Galen
Strawson fleshes out his naturalism:

What is the natural world, anyway? My view is open-ended. That’s a feature,
not a bug, since the nature of nature is open-ended. I have my own views, but
I wouldn’t go so far as to say that anyone who doesn’t conceive of nature in
the exact way that I do isn’t a naturalist.

Some theists and even naturalists will, for some reason, define naturalism in
a way that excludes consciousness from playing any role in fundamental
reality, indeed, any significant or creative role at all. (I should mention
that many naturalists _don’t_ do this, including physicalist naturalists.) But
this all seems very odd to me. On the part of naturalists, it seems to be a
bizarre and unnecessary concession. The concession is this: consciousness is,
in some important sense, not natural. That’s the implication, isn’t it? Why
else would views which regard consciousness as fundamental be excluded from
the naturalist camp _unless_ consciousness isn’t natural, in some sense? As
I’m sure you can guess by now, I find this suggestion patently absurd.
Experience is our first and fundamental datum, whether we’re naturalists or
theists or anything else. Treating experience as a _problem_ or something to
be explained away is a tendency that I’ll never understand and don’t care to.
But other naturalists feel differently. I would only ask that they don’t
exclude people like David Chalmers from the naturalist camp. As I mentioned,
drawing a line in the sand when it comes to consciousness, a contentious and
controversial area of study that’s so far from settled, seems especially
bizarre to me.

Naturalism is the view that there is only the natural world—reality is
exhausted by nature. Really, I think this simple definition gets the job done.
The rest of our time will be spent navigating potential objections and
defending this straightforward conception of naturalism.

Relatedly, another question that often comes up in a discussion like this is
the distinction between the natural and the supernatural. In a moment we’ll
briefly discuss “use theory” and how it can provide a meaningful distinction
between the two. But here, I wanted to offer one potential heuristic for
drawing the demarcation between “natural” and “supernatural”: the natural
world is that which theists and atheists agree on—stuff we both think is real.
Rocks, the ecosystem, bacteria, electrons; not angels, heaven, God. We agree
that rocks, the ecosystem, bacteria, and electrons exist. We don’t agree that
angels, heaven, and God exist. The natural world is whatever common ground
exists between atheists and theists. Of course, there are counterexamples and
edge cases here, but this is intended to be general. And certainly atheists
and theists are not monolithic groups who agree totally on what exists.
Nevertheless, this heuristic seems like a helpful way of beginning to
demarcate natural and supernatural. Angels? Definitely supernatural. Rocks?
Definitely natural. (This heuristic isn’t essential to my main contentions
about naturalism, so you can take it or leave it.)

Though, as I mentioned, many physicalist naturalists don’t make this mistake.
Sean Carroll, a prominent physicist and defender of naturalism, defines
naturalism thusly:

So, Naturalism is the view that there is only the natural world. But what is
the natural world? No one really knows, so it seems premature to give hard and
fast, determinate answers and go on to say, “This is the one true
interpretation of NATURALISM.” Look, go ahead and take a stab at answering,
“What is the natural world, anyway?” Go for it. But do not then declare your
answer to be the One True Form of Naturalism.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F08%2F18%2Fwhat-is-naturalism%2F&signup_flow=account)

The point is not that you have to agree with any of these shorthand accounts
of the natural world. The point is to sketch out how naturalism can start with
something simple like “There is only the natural world” and work from there to
a more elaborated, substantive worldview.

> “I am moved by strange sympathies; I say continually ‘I will be a
> naturalist.'”
>
> Ralph Waldo Emerson

The term theism derives from the Greek _theos_ or _theoi_ meaning “god” or
“gods.” “God-ism” doesn’t sound quite as illuminating, but that’s essentially
what “theism” means. “God-ism is the view that God exists” is identical with
“Theism is the view that God exists.” So why should “Naturalism is the view
that there is only the natural world” be held to a different standard? Sure,
naturalism isn’t the whole story. To explain the substance of their views,
naturalists will need to elaborate further. Similarly, everyone understands
that “theism” isn’t the whole story: further elaboration is required. And yet,
despite this, theism is not a meaningless weasel-word, hopelessly circular, or
anything of the sort.

There’s clearly no conflict between non-physicalism and the claim that god
doesn’t exist, nor is there a conflict between non-physicalism and the claim
that there is only the natural world. However, many haven’t bothered to
entertain non-physicalism because of its sociological connotations. Non-
physicalism is not an inherently religious viewpoint, nor is it inherently
“new age” or anti-naturalist. You can be an atheist and a naturalist while
rejecting physicalism. At any rate, I thought I’d include this as a footnote
to the larger discussion.

> Even though the theistic outlook, in some versions, is consistent with the
> available scientific evidence, I don’t believe it, and am drawn instead to a
> naturalistic, though non-materialist, alternative. Mind, I suspect, is not
> an inexplicable accident or a divine and anomalous gift but a basic aspect
> of nature that we will not understand until we transcend the built-in limits
> of contemporary scientific orthodoxy.
>
> Thomas Nagel

[Is God the Best Explanation of Things? A Dialogue – Joshua Rasmussen & Felipe
Leon](https://www.palgrave.com/gp/book/9783030237516) (this wasn’t mentioned
in the episode, but Leon does a wonderful job fleshing out “liberal
naturalism”

In a moment, I want to return to one thing Oppy says about “a prior
understanding of the distinction between the natural and the supernatural” and
how we might inform this distinction via “use theory.”

Another naturalist might say there is only the natural world, the natural
world is exhausted by the physical world, and the physical world is entirely
characterized by structure and relations: structure is all there is.

Though if I only had a minute to define naturalism and put some meat on the
bones, I would probably steal philosopher of mind Luke Roelofs’ answer in his
book _Combining Minds_ :

> “I’m a naturalist, an out-and-out naturalist, a philosophical or
> metaphysical naturalist, a naturalist about concrete reality. I don’t think
> anything supernatural or otherwise non-natural exists.
>
> You can’t classify anything as supernatural or non-natural until you have a
> substantive conception of the natural in relation to which something can be
> classified as non-natural. I do have one: I take it that concrete reality –
> anything that exists in space-time – is entirely physical.”

Naturalism is the view that there is only the natural world. I defend this
simple conception of naturalism, ward off a few criticisms, and argue that
there’s a kind of parity between the terms “theism” and “naturalism.” In other
words, if you don’t have a problem with the term “theism,” you shouldn’t have
a problem with “naturalism.”

Since no one sees a problem with the word “theism,” and everyone understands
that a Mormon and a Hindu can both be theists without rendering the term
“theism” meaningless, I see no reason to treat “naturalism” any differently.
Panpsychists and reductive materialists can both be naturalists, since both of
their positions are compatible with the view that reality is exhausted by
nature.

> “Naturalism says that causal reality is natural reality: the domain of
> causes is nothing more nor less than the natural world. Atheism says that
> there are no gods; in consequence, atheism says that there is no God.
> Naturalism entails atheism: if causal reality is natural reality, then there
> is no (supernatural) cause of natural reality, and, in particular, there is
> no God. But atheism does not entail naturalism: to deny that there are gods
> is not to insist that causal reality is natural reality. . . .
> Supernaturalism says that causal reality outstrips natural reality: there
> are supernatural causes. . . . This ‘minimal’ conception of naturalism
> relies on a prior understanding of the distinction between the natural and
> the supernatural (as did our ‘minimal’ conception of theism). We shall
> proceed on the assumption that we do understand this distinction well
> enough. If we come to have doubts about whether we do understand this
> distinction well enough, then we can return to give it more careful
> consideration. ‘Minimal naturalism’ admits of elaboration in many different
> – mutually inconsistent – ways. Any suitably elaborated naturalism will hold
> that some features of the natural world are primitive – not susceptible of
> further explanation – whereas other features of the natural world are fully
> explained in terms of those primitive features. Thus, for example, some
> naturalists suppose that all of the primitive features of the natural world
> are physical features – i.e. features that lie in the proper domain of the
> discipline of physics. Other naturalists suppose that there are features of
> the natural world . . . that cannot be fully explained in terms of the
> fundamental physical properties. The key point to note is that all
> naturalists suppose that there are no supernatural causal properties…”
>
> Graham Oppy

So for Strawson, naturalism means there is only the natural world. The natural
world is exhausted by the physical, and the physical itself is experience. The
behavior of the physical is modeled by physical science, but the concrete
reality which underlies that abstract description is experience.

Since I’m drawing frequent comparisons with theism, I’ll point out that this
exact progression is mirrored on the theistic side. Just as naturalists must
give content to “the natural world” after defining their position as “there is
only the natural world,” Theists must give content to “God” after defining
theism as “God exists.” There isn’t much a theist can say in their attempt to
elaborate theism and put some flesh on the bones that won’t exclude vast
numbers of other theists. God exists; he has attributes A and B but not
attributes C and D; his prophet was person X but not person Y, and _certainly_
not person Z; and so on and so forth. Theism, like naturalism, is a quite
general term that functions more as a starting point.

I know I’m being hard on skeptics and fallacy enthusiasts here, but that’s
because I used to lean on this crutch! In earlier episodes of Counter
Apologetics, you can hear me invoking these fallacies and dusting off my
hands. But as time went on, this tapered off. The usefulness of this approach
struck me as less and less credible, and talk about fallacies became quite
rare. I started rolling my eyes when I heard them mentioned at all.
Thankfully, philosophers like Boudry and Huemer put into words what was so
annoying and counterproductive about this mode of thinking.

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/), [atheist
community](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist-community/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [critical
thinking](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/critical-thinking/),
[criticism of fallacies](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/criticism-
of-fallacies/),
[critique](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/critique/), [critique of
fallacies](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/critique-of-fallacies/),
[debunked](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debunked/),
[epistemology](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/epistemology/),
[fallacies](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fallacies/), [fallacy
fork](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fallacy-fork/), [fallacy
lists](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fallacy-lists/), [fallacy
theory](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fallacy-theory/), [informal
logical fallacies](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/informal-
logical-fallacies/), [logical
fallacies](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/logical-fallacies/),
[maarten boudry](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/maarten-boudry/),
[michael huemer](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/michael-huemer/),
[misuse](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/misuse/),
[pigliucci](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/pigliucci/),
[skeptic](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptic/), [skeptic
community](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptic-community/),
[Skepticism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skepticism/)

“Well, I guess the argument wasn’t _really_ fallacious then. It seems like a
fallacy was committed, but that was just a false positive.” Yes, that’s the
point! It’s way too easy to misfire, even if everyone involved is acting in
good faith and isn’t unreasonable. What would we do with a metal detector that
misfired as often as this? Would we keep it, or would we throw it away?

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F04%2F21%2Flogical-fallacies%2F&signup_flow=account)

This whole approach where one simply utters a fallacy from a list of fallacies
during a discussion prevents us from going deeper. Playing “fallacy gotcha”
might be a good strategy for generating views in a WWE-style YouTube debate,
but it’s not so good for generating more light than heat. It greatly
oversimplifies the process of seeking truth, and it conveniently reduces the
complex, messy actual world into something more manageable.

> Every fallacy in the traditional taxonomy runs into a destructive dilemma
> that I call the Fallacy Fork: either it hardly ever occurs in real life, or
> it is not actually fallacious. […] arguments that are deemed ‘fallacious’
> according to the standard approach are always closely related to arguments
> that, in many contexts, are perfectly reasonable. Formally, the good and bad
> ones are indistinguishable. No argumentation scheme can succeed in capturing
> the difference, separating the wheat from the chaff.

Inferring that your nausea is the product of the wild mushrooms you ate thirty
minutes prior sounds a lot like the fallacy mentioned above. Yet, it’s a
perfectly reasonable inference to make. If we define our fallacies strictly
enough that they’re always fallacious, then they are incredibly rare. If we
define them less strictly so as to capture real-world inferences, they’re no
longer bad inferences and should not be regarded as fallacious. Inferring a
connection between dropping your laptop and it not working so well afterwards
is not an irrational inference, even though it sounds a lot like mistaking
correlation for causation.

The idea that logical fallacies can be set aside amounts to “moving the
goalposts.” “My argument is not logical? Well then, I’ll attack logic itself…”
I would expect nothing less from the mind of an atheist.

[The Fallacy Fork: Why It’s Time to Get Rid of Fallacy Theory – Maarten
Boudry](https://maartenboudry.be/2017/06/the-fallacy-fork-why-its-time-to-
get.html)

Of course, you’d want to show why those ideas are wrong. But you’re going to
be taken for a ride if you deem it irrational to ever take into account who is
making the argument. You’ll be worse off if you can’t say “You’ve got
interests at stake here. That’s why you’re elevating those scientists,” or
those economists, etc. Though, I’m _not_ saying “Party X has interests at
stake. Case closed.” Only that it’s not illegitimate to take those interests
into account. In fact, it would be pretty irrational to _not_ take them into
account. You’d be significantly _worse_ at navigating the world and getting to
the truth of the matter.

> I think the fallacy lists lure people into thinking that some perfectly good
> inferences are wrong, because these perfectly good inferences sound like
> what the fallacy definitions are talking about.

[The Fake, the Flimsy, and the Fallacious: Demarcating Arguments in Real Life
– Maarten Boudry, Fabio Paglieri & Massimo Pigliucci
](https://philpapers.org/rec/BOUTFT)

“Why is the ownership and management of Starbucks and Amazon so ferociously
opposing unionization efforts right now? Well, let’s get in the Amazon
classroom to watch a helpful informational video providing some arguments and
evidence that unions are bad to find out!”

Another example: genuine _ad hominems_ are rare. How often do we see arguments
or ideas rejected on the basis of unambiguously irrelevant information about
the party advancing them? The example case of an ad hominem on yourfallacyis
dot com is the following:

“Hey, why did those oil companies cover up their knowledge of climate change
for decades? Was it for some scientific reason?”

> Imagine you eat some mushrooms you picked in the forest. Half an hour later
> you feel nauseated, so you put two and two together: “Ugh. That must have
> been the mushrooms”. Are you committing a fallacy? Not as long as your
> inference is merely inductive and probabilistic. Intuitively, your inference
> depends on the following reasonable assumptions: 1) some mushrooms are toxic
> 2) it’s easy for a lay person like you to mistake a poisonous mushroom for a
> healthy one 3) nausea is a typical symptom of food intoxication 4) you don’t
> usually feel nauseated.

In a discussion, if one were to accuse me of committing some informal logical
fallacy, I’d be a lot more likely to try to explain that I’m _not_ committing
that fallacy rather than, in that instance, cast doubt on fallacy theory as a
whole. But it sure would be nice if we didn’t have to deal with these setbacks
in the first place. Shouldn’t we try prevention, rather than endlessly play
bad fallacy whack-a-mole? Sure, many use fallacies poorly, and that could
theoretically be remedied. But they’re _so likely_ to use them wrong, it would
be better to stigmatize the entire practice. You shouldn’t try to fly that
helicopter unless you’re an expert. Fallacies are also more likely to be
misused if they’re invoked on a whim. They’re still likely to be misused even
if they’re not invoked on a whim, but it’s comparatively more likely if they
are.

My motivation here is to try to improve the quality of our discourse and
debates, and to encourage better understanding of different positions and
viewpoints. In that spirit, a suggestion I have for improving the quality of
our discourse is to lay off the fallacy accusations a bit. It would lead to a
more fruitful search for knowledge and understanding.

We need to move past this point-scoring way of doing philosophy. It tends to
produce uncharitable, shallow criticisms – the sooner we can accuse someone of
begging the question or the such-and-such fallacy, the better. It’s boring,
I’m tired of it, and it actively prevents us from thinking. In the words of
Boudry, “Even bad ideas don’t deserve bad criticism.” And the hyper-focus on
fallacies overwhelmingly yields bad criticism.

On the difficult question of how to discriminate between good and bad forms of
reasoning, Maarten Boudry, Fabio Paglieri, Massimo Pigliucci [in the journal
_Argumentation_ write](https://philpapers.org/rec/BOUTFT),

“Fallacy,” in its most basic sense, just means “mistake in reasoning.”
Clearly, there’s no problem with identifying mistakes in reasoning, but
assessing arguments is not always easy. Many have nevertheless tried to come
up with shorthand lists of fallacies that reliably separate the wheat from the
chaff. This has not gone so well. It does not seem as if there is any tidy
master list of irrational moves that we can simply cross-check with a given
argument and conclusively settle the matter. While there’s no issue to be
taken with “fallacy” in the basic sense – we obviously want to identify
mistakes in reasoning – there are a number of problems with the mode of
thinking one can find on display wherever fallacy lists are waved around. Do
the arguments made out in the wild really accord with these abstract
blueprints? Or is it the case, [as some philosophers have
argued](https://maartenboudry.be/2017/06/the-fallacy-fork-why-its-time-to-
get.html), that “fallacy theory” is a simplistic, facile approach to assessing
arguments?

This practice of constantly invoking logical fallacies is kind of pointless.
Crying foul at every turn doesn’t advance the conversation – it’s an
impediment to substantive dialogue. It’s not even clear that one has done
something irrational in apparently committing one of these fallacies. Fallacy
labels are casually invoked in a way that distracts from the substance of an
issue, yields shallow criticism, and doesn’t even accomplish the ostensible
purpose of demarcating good and bad reasoning.

> Not even the most superstitious person believes that correlation
> _automatically_ implies causation, or that any succession of two events A
> and B implies that A caused B. There are just too many things going on in
> the world, and not enough causal connections to account for them. In its
> clear-cut deductive guise, the _post hoc ergo propter hoc_ inference is a
> fallacy, to be sure, but hardly anyone makes it in real life. This is the
> first prong of the Fallacy Fork. So what about the kind of _post hoc_
> arguments that people do use in real life? (Pinto 1995) As it turns out,
> many of those are not obviously mistaken. It all depends on the context.

Casually hitting the fallacy buzzer without putting much thought into it can
lull one into thinking they’ve “debunked” an argument when they’ve done no
such thing. It’s easy to mislabel something as fallacious, especially since
members of the Fallacy Brigade don’t seem very worried about false positives.
This bad habit stops people from thinking, and conveniently makes the world a
lot simpler.

As Michael Huemer notes in his book, [_Knowledge, Reality, and Value: A Mostly
Common Sense Guide to Philosophy_](https://www.amazon.com/Knowledge-Reality-
Value-Mostly-Philosophy/dp/B091F5QTDS),

How often does anything like that happen? False positives, however, are
abundant. There’s nothing fallacious about bringing up _relevant_ negative
information about the party involved (e.g., that a media outlet has a history
of lying is not irrelevant negative information). Additionally, lobbing
insults is sometimes mistaken as an _ad hominem_ argument. (Insulting someone
is not a “fallacy.”) Rejecting ideas and arguments on the basis of irrelevant
negative information about the party advancing them is not that common (e.g.,
your argument is bad because you have terrible fashion sense). Far more common
is an appeal to _relevant_ information about the party advancing the idea, or
just good ol’ fashioned insults.

> This is a problem of demarcation akin to the one between science and
> pseudoscience, which has kept philosophers of science busy ever since Popper
> proposed his falsifiability criterion as a way of demarcating genuine
> science. In both cases, the initial attraction of pursuing such a
> demarcation project is to find some shortcut for dismissing bad theories or
> arguments, sparing us the effort of analyzing each and every specimen.
> Philosophers of science have given up on this silver bullet approach to
> demarcation (Pigliucci and Boudry 2013b). In argumentation theory, too,
> identifying fallacies has turned out to be more complicated than initially
> hoped for. . . . almost every known type of fallacy (both formal and
> informal) is closely related to forms of reasoning that are acceptable moves
> in a debate (Hahn and Oaksford 2006, 2007; Hansen and Pinto 1995; Walton
> 1992, 1995, 2010b; Yap 2012). In spite of this increased sophistication, the
> quest for silver bullets still seems to be part and parcel of the taxonomies
> of fallacies.

I definitely agree with you about this, and had much the same journey.

The stubborn plausibility of false positives is crucial here. A reasonable
person could say, “It sounds like you just committed the X Fallacy.” And I’d
say, “Yeah, you’re right. It _does_ sound like I committed the X Fallacy. And
yet, the argument makes sense.”

It would be convenient to have a handy list of fallacy blueprints, which we
could use to identify bad reasoning, totally abstracted away from the specific
content and dialectical context. Sadly, the real world doesn’t seem to conform
to these hopes. As much as this might scandalize the online skeptic community,
fallacies don’t really matter as much as they seem to think. Even if an
argument does plausibly sound like it commits something listed on
yourfallacyis dot com, the argument might not be a bad one.

“Why do so many rich people financially support economically right-wing
figures and outlets? Why aren’t there more billionaires supporting
economically left-wing figures and outlets? Probably just because the ideas
are better.”

> After Sally presents an eloquent and compelling case for a more equitable
> taxation system, Sam asks the audience whether we should believe anything
> from a woman who isn’t married, was once arrested, and smells a bit weird.

[Knowledge, Reality, and Value: A Mostly Common Sense Guide to Philosophy –
Michael Huemer](https://www.amazon.com/Knowledge-Reality-Value-Mostly-
Philosophy/dp/B091F5QTDS)

Maarten Boudry [expands on this problem of false
positives](https://maartenboudry.be/2017/06/the-fallacy-fork-why-its-time-to-
get.html), describing a “fallacy fork,” which is a dilemma of sorts for those
who approach every issue with their hand hovering above the fallacy buzzer at
all moments:

Discriminating between good reasoning and bad reasoning is no easy task, and
these taxonomies of fallacies function as shortcuts for thinking. Certain
abstract schemes of argumentation are deemed haram, and if an argument
plausibly fits into one of these fallacious argumentation schemes, then we’re
done.

One egregious example of a false positive I came across _in a logic textbook_
dismissed all consideration of material interests as fallacious _ad hominem_
reasoning. One who took this advice would lead a quite confused existence.
“Gee, I guess all that scientific research from the tobacco business that
shows smoking doesn’t cause cancer is genuine. I mean, it’d be completely
fallacious to treat that research with skepticism because of their material
interests at stake.” Not everyone is arguing in good faith. And even many who
_are_ approaching things in good faith are being elevated and promoted by
those who aren’t. Fringe perspectives are often given far more than their fair
share of airtime for that reason.

Let’s return to the helicopter analogy. What if we discovered that the
majority of these helicopters were flown by amateur pilots? (Many seasoned
pilots crashed as well, but it was mainly amateurs.) Maybe the conclusion we
should draw at that point is not that the new helicopter is faulty, but that
for whatever reason it’s harder to fly than other models. The problem with
fallacies is that everyone thinks they understand them. There’s no helicopter
crash that occurs when a YouTube debater erroneously accuses their opponent of
cherry-picking or fallaciously appealing to emotion, and there’s no safe
helicopter landing when one successfully identifies a genuine instance of
_post hoc_ reasoning. I don’t want to sound absolutist; fallacies _can_ be
used well. However, the current state leaves much to be desired.

Take a look at nearly any book on critical thinking and you’ll come across a
list of fallacies: _ad hominem_ , argument from ignorance, the naturalistic
fallacy, god of the gaps, appeal to authority. Informal logical fallacies like
these are invoked very often in the skeptic community and elsewhere. The
problem is that many of these “fallacies” closely resemble good lines of
reasoning. Just because an argument can be superficially labeled fallacious
doesn’t actually mean it’s a bad argument. Overreliance on fallacy lists
fosters shallow criticism, distracts from the substance of an issue, and
doesn’t even accomplish the ostensible purpose of demarcating good and bad
reasoning. For those reasons, I think we should be a lot less trigger-happy in
this area.

There’s plenty to be said in defense of the use of fallacies. As said at the
outset, there’s no issue with “fallacy” in the basic sense of “mistake in
reasoning.” Cherry-picking data is fallacious. Insulting the party advancing
an idea with irrelevant negative information in order to defeat their argument
would indeed be fallacious. And if you apply the common fallacies carefully,
with thought and deliberation, then they can be a useful tool. They can
function as a conversation starter, rather than a conversation stopper. In
other words, if the vast majority of fallacy enthusiasts start using them
completely differently than they’re currently using them, they’re clearly
salvageable. But when most people misuse a tool, at what point do we start
blaming the tool? If a new helicopter is manufactured, and 90% of them crash,
are we going to blame the individual operators each and every time? Are we
going to point to the 10% that don’t crash and say that there’s no problem
here; it’s always pilot error; people just misuse the tool?

The problem of false positives is no small issue, but there are other reasons
to want everyone to chill out a bit with the casual invocation of fallacies.
It almost always works as a conversation stopper, for one. It keeps the
discussion at a maddeningly superficial level. And since it gives many the
false impression that an argument is no longer defensible, it leads to
overconfidence and dogmatism.

In a nutshell, I think that genuine skepticism is far less important to the
skeptic community at large than the _kind of conclusions_ one comes to.
“Skepticism,” in practice, is just a list of beliefs you’re expected to adopt.
Much of the skeptic community doesn’t live up to its professed values, and
many leaders of the skeptic community have proven themselves to be
untrustworthy sources of information on the topics they speak about. They’ve
frequently misled me about what others believe and why. (I have another
related episode planned about the pointlessness of informal logical fallacies.
This is also an attack on skeptics, since casually invoking fallacies
constitutes about 90% of skeptics’ reasoning capacities.)

I’ve come to think having a “freethinking” group will never work. By
definition any group will have a common purpose and beliefs, for cohesion
probably isn’t even possible otherwise. That will necessarily constrain
things. At the very least, it will be very difficult to prevent this.

At a few points, I chose to use incendiary examples when I could have opted
for examples that weren’t so controversial. Typically, I see theism vs.
atheism taken as a case to illustrate some of the same points I made, but I
chose to rely mainly on conspiracy theories instead. So, for the same reason
some atheists are called “crypto-theists” for failing to have a sufficiently
crude understanding of theism that never strays from a disparaging tone, I
know I’ll be called a conspiracy theorist. That really can’t be helped. Within
the skeptic community, you cannot talk about some subjects in anything other
than an uncompromisingly derisive way.

For the record, this should not be seen as a comprehensive treatment of the
topics raised (e.g. conspiracy theories). My framework was the following:
Skeptics told me conspiracy theorists believed X for reason Y, but they were
often wrong on both counts. I used a few examples, but I wasn’t aiming to
provide a full account of what 9/11 truthers believe, or what alien abductees
think, nor was I trying to defend a rejection of the Warren Commission. (I
especially shied away from that last topic, since it’s a bit different from
the others for me. In the case of the JFK assassination, I’m more solidly on
the side of the conspiracy theorists. Along with the majority of Americans, I
don’t accept the Warren Commission.)

Tagged [9/11](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/9-11/),
[Aliens](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aliens/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/), [conspiracy
theories](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/conspiracy-theories/),
[conspiracy theory](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/conspiracy-
theory/), [cringe](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/cringe/),
[jfk](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/jfk/), [michael
shermer](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/michael-shermer/),
[ness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ness/),
[neurologica](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/neurologica/),
[novella](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/novella/), [online
skeptic community](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/online-skeptic-
community/),
[parapsychology](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/parapsychology/),
[randi](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/randi/),
[skeptic](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptic/), [skeptic
community](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptic-community/),
[skeptic's guide](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptics-guide/),
[skeptic's guide to the
universe](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptics-guide-to-the-
universe/),
[Skepticism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skepticism/),
[uaps](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/uaps/),
[ufos](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ufos/), [why I left the
skeptic community](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/why-i-left-the-
skeptic-community/), [why I'm leaving the skeptic
community](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/why-im-leaving-the-
skeptic-community/)

I would also urge you to not take this as some kind of theory about the
skeptic community, followed by endnotes and citations. This is a mostly
disorganized and incomplete story about how I gravitated towards a certain
group and how I drifted away. I don’t begrudge anyone who wants to remain a
part of the skeptic community. I just don’t fit in there. I also don’t mean to
imply that _every_ skeptic is an incurious dogmatist and conformist. I respect
many skeptics and would vouch for a number of them.

This to me, is similar to being a freethinker. There is a script of what is
allowed freethinking, which does not include discussing any philosophy that
doesn’t support the agenda.  
I did a post about freethinking a while back in my ignorance, thinking it was
more about crowdsourcing ideations. I learned very quickly it is not.

After watching your video I agree with you on much. Part of the problem with
skepticism is the same problem that religions face—any time something becomes
institutionalized it becomes corrupted. The alphas take over the narrative
(self interest) and leave genuine thinkers on the fringes —again and again.

That’s a loose description of what the skeptic community is, what they
believe, and why I have a problem with them. To reiterate: a number of
skeptics fail to live up to their professed values, including many leaders in
the skeptic community, who have repeatedly proven themselves to be
untrustworthy sources of information on the topics they speak about; and their
analysis of why people believe what they believe is often _astonishingly_
superficial.

The skeptic community, for me, was composed of a handful of organizations,
online groups, podcasts, and figureheads. Center for Inquiry (CFI), James
Randi Educational Foundation (JREF), the Skeptics Guide to the Universe, the
New Atheists, and various online groups, smaller podcasts, and so on. They
organized events like The Amazing Meeting, Skepticon, and other conferences
and conventions that discussed skepticism, atheism, science education,
activism, and other subjects.

What are they skeptical of? God, bigfoot, parapsychology, conspiracy theories,
homeopathy, ghosts, dualism, aliens, and other things they take to be
irrational or pseudoscientific. People only believe in God, conspiracy
theories, souls, aliens, and so on because they suffer from cognitive biases
and are prone to committing informal logical fallacies.

This is not a “why I’m leaving the skeptic community” video, because I haven’t
been a part of the skeptic community for years at this point. Of course, my
experiences from within the community from (about) 2015-2019 might not reflect
yours. It seems that the character of the skeptic community has changed in the
intervening years, especially politically. I’m only speaking to my
experiences, the stories I heard, things I saw, etc. when I was an active
member of the online skeptic community.

For a more accurate picture of what these common skeptic targets believe and
why:

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F04%2F13%2Fhow-i-became-disillusioned-with-the-skeptic-community%2F&signup_flow=account)

It should be noted that Peter Singer is the exception and not the rule. He’s
been uniquely successful among philosophers in producing moral philosophy that
affects positive change in the real world. Were I to make the case in favor of
ethical thought experiments, Singer’s work would be Exhibit A (and possibly
the only exhibit).

Those two points pretty much capture my problem with ethical thought
experiments. Information has been added, and other information has been
subtracted, and the end result is that we’re talking about an alternate world
that only exists in our minds. Again, this is fine in other areas of
philosophy. But ethical philosophy is different: it’s supposed to guide our
moral actions in our real lives. That’s why the uncanny valley of simultaneous
lack and inclusion of detail is a problem.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2020%2F07%2F17%2Fare-ethical-thought-experiments-entirely-useless%2F&signup_flow=account)

This is a serious limitation of thought experiments. It’s oftentimes difficult
to distinguish realistic from unrealistic circumstances, and it’s very hard to
distinguish acceptable from unacceptable conclusions. These two ingredients
that make a thought experiment worthwhile (a clearly unacceptable conclusion
under clearly imaginable circumstances) are hard to discern in practice.

Moral philosophers tend to assume that thought experiments make ethical
choices clearer by abstracting them (i.e. eliminating all context and creating
a world that doesn’t exist), but those with relevant expertise tend to see
these abstracting moves as losses of clarity and morally relevant detail. All
real world problems emerge in a context. There’s always a history, and all the
subtleties that come along with it.

The best response to my case against ethical thought experiments is the work
of Peter Singer. Singer uses thought experiments in his work, and there’s one
in particular that seems to make an impression on everyone.

I also think the resistance to speaking frankly about current events or real
scenarios is simply because it’s harder to do. It’s harder to talk about
torture in the real world or Israel/Palestine or abortion than it is to dream
up thought experiments that you claim are relevant to those issues. It’s
easier to create an imaginary world where there are no real stakes, where we
have more information about the consequences of our actions than we actually
would, and less information about all that annoying context. But what good
does that do us? This is applied moral philosophy. Isn’t it supposed to be
practical at some point? I don’t care what I should do in a world in which I
do not live!

Let’s switch gears for a moment. Thought experiments have played a crucial
role in the development of mathematics, philosophy, and science. As
implausible as it may seem, reasoning _a priori_ , comfortably from our
armchairs, can actually teach us about the real world and even drive progress
in physical science. This makes perfect sense in the realm of mathematics, but
you might think, “Surely thought experiments aren’t enough when it comes to
the physical nature of things, how they’ll behave in the real world. We need
_actual_ experiments.” And you’d be right, generally speaking: you need to go
out and look at the world to figure out how it works. But I want to discuss
one thought experiment from Galileo that proves you don’t always have to. You
can use reason alone to draw interesting and true conclusions about the world.

And some will try to defend thought experiments, like the one of the tortured
boy in the dungeon. They’ll say, “Aha! It IS like the real world because of x,
y, and z.” They’re the prophet Nathan revealing to King David that the parable
was really about him. But then we’re just back to arguing over whether thought
experiment A is like real world situation B. It’s entirely possible to agree
on the thought experiment and still disagree in the real world situation,
since these are two different worlds.

When you invoke some thought experiment to adjudicate a real world scenario,
you’re taking two disanalogous situations and insisting that they’re
analogous. I already know they’re disanalogous before I know any more detail
because one is a thought experiment and the other is the real world. Who knows
what subtleties have been lost in the sanitized, idealized, depersonalized
scenario.

Aristotle held that heavier objects would fall faster to the ground than
lighter objections. If he was right, the cannonball would hit the ground
before the musket ball. Galileo invites us to imagine that we tied the
cannonball and musket ball together and asks, “Would the new object fall
faster than the lone cannonball or slower?” Well, obviously it would fall
slower. If lighter objects fall slower, a lighter object tied to a heavier one
should bring down the speed. The musket ball will act as a parachute, holding
back the speed with which the cannonball is descending, so the two objects
together should fall slower. But hang on — when we tie the two objects
together, we’ve made a bigger, heavier object. The two tied together are
heavier than the cannonball alone — it’s cannonball + musket ball. And if
heavier objects fall faster than lighter objects, the two tied together should
fall faster than the cannonball by itself. So the musket ball, falling at a
slower rate, should drag down the speed the cannonball is falling. And the two
objects tied together are heavier than the cannonball, meaning it should fall
faster. So if we take Aristotle’s theory seriously, the two objects tied
together would fall both slower and faster than cannonball falling alone. His
theory, that heavier and lighter objects fall at different rates, leads to a
contradiction. So what conclusion do we draw? Heavier and lighter objects fall
at the same rate. That seems counterintuitive, but it must be the case that
lighter and heavier objects fall at the same rate, since Aristotle’s view
leads to a contradiction.

But then there are ethical thought experiments, where thought experiments seem
to be the most abundant and the least helpful. If you ask me, these short
hypothetical scenarios are almost useless. They’re often presented context-
free, eliminating relevant detail. And in the course of probing our moral
intuitions, they often include detail that we wouldn’t have in the real world.
In the end, we’re discussing a hypothetical world vastly different from the
real world.

One reason Wilson’s criticism of thought experiments appealed to me is because
I’m some sort of utilitarian, and philosophers love to conjure up ludicrous
thought experiments to demonstrate that utilitarianism is false. What if
everything was literally perfect, but it was only so because we were torturing
a young boy in a dungeon, because we struck a deal with a wizard who offered
the town this devil’s bargain? (I would say the fact that they have to create
a universe that does not exist to turn people against utilitarianism works
_against_ the point they’re trying to make.)

Despite my criticism, I don’t think thought experiments are _entirely_
worthless. They’ve played an important role in the development of science and
philosophy, but I think I can safely say they often fail to clarify a
situation, especially in ethics. I’ve heard debaters get so lost in the
details of a thought experiment, which is not identical, and may not even be
_analogous_ to the subject at hand, that they lose sight entirely of the
actual subject of the debate. I’ve witnessed derailments like this in
philosophy of mind, in the kalam and fine-tuning arguments, as well as
numerous debates in moral philosophy. It’s especially in the latter case that
I think we need a massive reduction in the number of thought experiments.
Argue about real life! You will _never_ run out of material.

Additionally, there are some thought experiments that are so divorced from
reality that it’s hard to begin to list the problems with them. Once, I was
arguing with an antinatalist, and I pointed out that in addition to pain,
there’s this other thing called pleasure, a concept that appears to be foreign
to many antinatalists. Life seems to be worth living to most of us, even
though pain is terrible. There are good parts to life that seem to make it
worth living. His response was the following thought experiment. Imagine you
were subjected to the worst pain imaginable for an hour, but that you’d enjoy
the greatest pleasure imaginable for an hour afterwards. Would you take the
deal? I explained that I was suspicious of thought experiments like this, that
I was convinced they confused more than they clarified, and that scenarios
like his seem too disanalogous to possibly be relevant. I asked if we could
keep our discussion to the real world. He declined to continue speaking with
me. Keep in mind, we were talking about whether or not we should _continue the
human species_. We were discussing whether or not it’s okay to have children.
If you say to me it’s immoral to have children, and I ask why, and you say,
“Imagine someone offered to subject you to torture for an hour, but immense
pleasure for an hour,” who should be losing patience with whom? Given the
radical conclusion being drawn, the relevance of the thought experiment is
pretty important. And imagine if I had engaged. We’d still be going back and
forth an hour later, adding and subtracting detail, talking past each other
endlessly.

I suspect the resistance to speaking about current events or real scenarios is
that it’s harder to do so. It’s easier to create an imaginary world where
there are no real stakes, where we have more information about the
consequences of our actions than we actually would, and less information about
all that irritating context. I say that if you want to defend torture, talk
about actual instances of torture–not thought experiments about torture. If
you have to create a world that doesn’t exist to make your case, you don’t
have a case. And besides, I don’t care what I should do in a world that I
don’t live in. As James Wilson writes, “Overall, ethical thought experiments
are, at best, fallible ways of constructing simplified models that map rather
imperfectly onto the world as we experience it, and can distort as much as
they illuminate.” So should we give up on moral thought experiments? Not
necessarily. We could make use of them as long as we understand their
limitations (which, at least at this moment, do not seem to be widely
appreciated). There’s a sort of ‘only game in town’ argument to be made in
defense thought experiments. We’re working with a flawed tool, but what’s the
alternative? In moral philosophy, I would say it’s talking about the real
world and robust fiction.

Runaway trolleys, violinists, utility monsters. In my view, ethical thought
experiments are rarely persuasive, clarifying, relevant, or decisive. They
also don’t seem to help those who are really in the trenches. How does musing
over a violinist help clinicians who are working in the very messy real world?
I mean, isn’t moral philosophy supposed to be a bit more relevant to our lives
than other areas of philosophy? I like to talk about consciousness. But I do
that for its own sake–it’s fun and interesting. I’m not under a delusion that
philosophy of mind has the same weight as deciding the legal status of
abortion. Here’s James Wilson, a critic of ethical thought experiments, on the
famous violinist thought experiment:

Most historians don’t believe that Galileo actually performed the experiment
of dropping two objects, a cannonball and a musket ball, from the leaning
tower of Pisa (or at least not as it’s reported by Galileo’s student). Of
course, if you wanted to demonstrate that two objects of different weights
fall at the same rate and reach the ground at the same time, you would want to
go try it out in the real world at some point. But in Galileo’s work _On
Motion_ , he doesn’t report any empirical data. Instead, he makes use of a
thought experiment to undermine Aristotelian physics.

Wilson makes another good point about “ethically relevant features” of a
situation: “Faced with people who don’t ‘get’ a thought experiment, the
temptation for philosophers is to say that these people aren’t sufficiently
good at isolating what is ethically relevant. Obviously, such a response risks
being self-serving, and tends to gloss over an important question: how should
we determine what are the ethically relevant features of a situation? Why, for
example, should a philosopher sitting in an armchair be in a better position
to determine the ethically relevant features of ‘The Violinist’ than someone
who’s worked with thousands of patients?”

According to professor Patrick Grim, there are two crucial elements in a good
thought experiment: under clearly imaginable circumstances, a theory leads to
a clearly unacceptable conclusion. In this case, a contradiction. If the
circumstances are not really imaginable, either because they’re incoherent, or
don’t take into account our lack of information in some area, or some other
reason, then the thought experiment is about some world other than the one we
live in, and perhaps no world that even could exist. If the thought experiment
doesn’t lead us to a clearly unacceptable conclusion, then it doesn’t
undermine the theory in question. To borrow a couple more examples from
physics: Einstein’s theories predicted time dilation, and to many, that was
intuitively ridiculous. But it turns out time dilation wasn’t the clearly
unacceptable conclusion that some thought it to be. The same could be said of
Copernicus, who Martin Luther referred to as “that fool” who wanted to “turn
the whole of astronomy upside down.”

> “Overall, ethical thought experiments are, at best, fallible ways of
> constructing simplified models that map rather imperfectly onto the world as
> we experience it, and can distort as much as they illuminate. … Responsible
> thinking requires calibrating our levels of credence to the reliability of
> our intellectual tools. Clearly, ethical thought experiments are not
> particularly reliable tools. But that’s not to say that we have other, more
> reliable tools. … Ethical thinking is hard, and even our best tools for
> doing it are not very good. Humility should be the watchword.”

Philosophers, at this point, are likely tempted to think that they’re just
smarter than all these thickheaded doctors who can’t seem to follow the
stipulations of the thought experiment. But keep in mind, these particular
clinicians Wilson is telling us about are experts in this area. It’d be like
an expert in foreign policy, say on the Israel/Palestine conflict, trying and
failing to tell a philosophy student that their thought experiment, intended
to clarify the situation, actually muddies the waters in a way that’s totally
unhelpful. The more knowledge one possesses on a given subject, the less value
thought experiments tend to have. The problem with these hypotheticals is
precisely what moral philosophers like about them: they are idealized and
oversimplified versions of the world. They’re nearly always presented context-
free, but real world scenarios always come to us in a context. Thought
experiments are additionally presented with details about future consequences
that we simply wouldn’t have in real life. The end result is a scenario vastly
different from the ordinary scenarios in which our ethical sensibilities are
formed and exercised.

In fact, thought experiments are essentially really bad fiction. If you’re
going to talk about fiction, talk about TV shows, movies, and books. They
don’t suffer from the problems raised to anything like the extent of the
terrible, contextless stories philosophers tell.

In thought experiments designed to probe our moral intuitions, we often find
ourselves in highly unusual circumstances, where those moral intuitions are
arguably useless. One might respond that thought experiments _are_ unusual in
that they’re simplified situations, but that’s okay. That sort of thing can
help illustrate general principles. I suppose that’s fine if your thought
experiment is something like, “Imagine a frictionless plane…” but for ethical
thought experiments…? I’m not against thought experiments in every area.
Probing our intuition can be useful and interesting, and it’s driven progress
in mathematics and science, as well as areas of philosophy outside ethics. But
probing our moral intuitions with a thought experiment is a bit different.

This is one reason I take fiction to be a superior way to explore moral
philosophy than traditional thought experiments: there’s an inclusion of
history, context, and human detail such that the story is more easily
translated to our lives. The power of myth is greater than the power of
thought experiments.

Maybe I’m confused. I, perhaps naively, thought the aim of applied ethical
philosophy was to figure out how to behave. You know — in real life. In this
universe that we live in. So creating a scenario that would literally never
occur in real life — i.e. a vast number ethical thought experiments — is a
pointless exercise.

> “From the perspective of philosophers, the point here is clear, even if [the
> author’s] conclusion is controversial. In the few instances I tried to use
> this thought experiment in teaching ethics to clinicians, they mostly found
> it a bad and confusing example. Their problem is that they know too much.
> For them, the example is physiologically and institutionally implausible,
> and problematically vague in relevant details of what happened and how. …
> Moreover, clinicians find this thought experiment bizarre in its complete
> lack of attention to other plausible real-world alternatives, such as
> dialysis or transplant. As a result, excellent clinicians might fail to even
> see the analogy with pregnancy, let alone find it helpful in their ethical
> reasoning about abortion.”

The reason I say Singer’s work is the best counter argument is because he’s
effective: he’s actually succeeding in changing the minds and behavior of
those who listen to him. I think one reason it’s not like other thought
experiments is that it’s easy to see how it is analogous to our lives and very
hard to argue that it’s not, as uncomfortable the implications may be. Singer
has actually made the world a better place by reducing suffering, and he has
literally saved human lives as a direct result of presenting his pond thought
experiment. He and groups he works with have changed legislation in order to
improve living conditions for animals. Many have changed their lifestyles as a
direct result of his work, be it turning vegan or donating money they don’t
need in order to save human lives.

My point is not that talking about the real world is a flawless means of
arriving at moral truth. My point is that it’s far _less_ flawed than talking
about a thought experiment. I would say _fiction_ is far superior to thought
experiments. In a way, thought experiments are just really, really bad
fiction. A serious limitation of talking about the real world (or high-quality
fiction), is that the presentation of the real world scenario might be so
restricted and oversimplified that we end up right back where we started. A
drastically oversimplified account is no better than a thought experiment. On
the other hand, we might end up writing War and Peace if we try to fully flesh
out the context and morally relevant detail. But who said moral reasoning
would be easy? We should err on the side of complexity, not simplicity. To
quote Wilson, “[E]ven our best tools for [ethical thinking] are not very good.
Humility should be the watchword.”

Eventually, Galileo’s thought experiment was tested — on the moon, no less. A
feather and a hammer were dropped at the same time. And in the near vacuum,
the feather and the hammer hit the ground at the same time. So Galileo has
been experimentally confirmed. But I would say we already knew he was right.
Pure rational reflection can sometimes lead us to truths about the real world.

What exactly follows from an ethical thought experiment? If we establish that
x or y action is wrong in the thought experiment, have we demonstrated that
it’s always wrong to do x or y? Have we demonstrated anything interesting at
all? What inevitably follows a thought experiment is some philosopher
insisting that thought experiment A is like real world situation B. But that
doesn’t follow. A doesn’t translate to B precisely because we’ve eliminated
several details from the real world scenario, and because we’ve often been
given too much information, information that we wouldn’t actually have (e.g.
information about the consequences of our actions).

In a crucial way, we have an excess of information that further divorces
thought experiments from reality. While we have less information in thought
experiments than we do in the real world, in one big way we have more
information: we know a lot more about the consequences of our potential
actions. Many ethical thought experiments fall in an uncanny valley of too
much information and not enough information. Relevant context and detail is
eliminated, so there’s a lack of information that would irritate and confuse
anyone with expertise; and there’s too much information about the consequences
of our actions. (If we push this fat man, the five people will be saved; if we
continue to torture this boy, the city will continue thriving in prosperity.)
We have more information than we ordinarily would and less information than we
ordinarily would. The elimination of relevant information that we usually
possess and inclusion of information that we don’t ordinarily possess renders
many ethical thought experiments worse than useless.

This fact was certainly not lost on many Indians. Chatterjee described Mother
Teresa’s missionary work as “an imperialist venture of the Catholic Church
against an Eastern population.” Mohan Bhagwat, chief of a major Indian
political party, said in a speech that “Mother Teresa’s work had ulterior
motives, which were to convert the person who was being served to
Christianity.” According to Fr. Leo Maasburg, one of Mother Teresa’s many
sycophants, she would often baptize Hindu patients without their consent or
understanding. Again, this is according to one of her _supporters_.

“Give a man a reputation as an early riser, and he can sleep ’til noon,” said
Mark Twain. Mother Teresa’s persona eclipsed anything that even she could say.
No matter what she did, no matter what she herself said in no matter how
mainstream a publication, nearly everyone – including the reporters themselves
– continued to perceive her as the glowing moral icon most know her to be. The
tone of the coverage of Mother Teresa never diverged far from Muggeridge’s
original portrayal of her. This worshipful handling, combined with her
skillful knack for self-promotion and hunger for fame snowballed into the
reputation she retains to this day.

Mother Teresa Said to Gain After Receiving a Pacemaker. New York Times. 1989.

These are not the words of an apolitical humanitarian. Keep in mind she worked
in India, one of the most overpopulated regions on earth. This overpopulation
greatly contributed to the appalling poverty in India, which, of course, she
had no interest in alleviating. Her message of “no contraceptives”
accomplished nothing other than to increase the amount of suffering and
poverty in the world, as well as to prevent women from controlling their own
reproduction. This was one of her primary goals. She devoted much of her time
not to aiding the poor, but rather to campaigning against abortion and
contraceptives. Hitchens wrote, “She spent her life opposing the only known
cure for poverty, which is the empowerment of women and the emancipation of
them from a livestock version of compulsory reproduction.”

Hitchens wrote one of the only critical books on Mother Teresa in existence
(according to Larivée, it’s one of about a half dozen). Hitchens had the
opportunity to speak to Mother Teresa personally and offered his criticism of
some of her practices. He reported, “It was by talking to her that I
discovered, and she assured me, that she wasn’t working to alleviate poverty.
She was working to expand the number of Catholics. She said, ‘I’m not a social
worker, I don’t do it for this reason. I do it for Christ, I do it for the
church.’” So don’t take my word for it, take _her_ word for it. She’s not
doing social work; she’s only trying to convert more Catholics.

During a speech at the National Prayer Breakfast, Mother Teresa claimed that
“the greatest destroyer of peace today is abortion.” Whatever you may think
about abortion, no one can honestly assert that it’s _the_ obstacle to world
peace. Campaigning in Ireland, she said, “Let us promise … that we will never
allow in this country a single abortion,” before adding, “and no
contraceptives,” to smattering applause from a confused crowd.

Dr. Chatterjee wrote that Mother Teresa had an “obsession with suffering.” She
believed that “Suffering [is] a gift from God,” and once quipped, “There is
something beautiful in seeing the poor accept their lot, to suffer it like
Christ’s Passion. The world gains much from their suffering.” She never
claimed to want to alleviate poverty or suffering, and she said as much
whenever anyone bothered to ask. As journalist Christopher Hitchens memorably
put it, “She was not a friend of the poor; she was a friend of poverty.” Of
course, she did want to work with the poor and said so on many occasions.
Decent people interpret such a sentiment to mean interest in reducing poverty,
but not Mother Teresa.

Another reason it’s difficult to break the spell is that the Catholic Church,
one the richest and most powerful organizations in human history, prefers it
to remain unbroken. Saint Teresa was an excellent public relations figure for
the church, something they’re desperate for in the midst of a decades-long,
ongoing barrage of child rape scandals.

Muggeridge also propagated a dubious miracle story from the filming of the BBC
documentary that helped create the divine aura her credulous admirers
perceive. A crewmember recounting the story of the alleged miracle reported:
“There was an episode where we were taken to a building that Mother Teresa
called the House of the Dying, and [the director] said ‘Well, it’s very dark
in here. Do you think we can get anything?’” The crew had just received
special film, made by Kodak, which they hadn’t had time to test before they
left. They filmed in the darkened rooms with the new film, and it worked as it
was intended. They crewman recalled, “I said, ‘That’s amazing! That’s
extraordinary!’ And I was going to say, you know, three cheers for Kodak. I
didn’t get a chance to say that, because [Muggeridge] spun around and said,
‘It’s divine light! It’s Mother Teresa! You’ll find that it’s divine light,
old boy!’ And three or four days later, I was being phoned by journalists from
London newspapers who were saying things like, ‘We hear that you’ve just come
back from India with Malcolm Muggeridge and you were the witness of a
miracle.’”

Mother Teresa is a cultural symbol of compassion and love for the poor. If you
read almost anything written about her, she’s presented as the embodiment of
sacrifice and humility, a beacon of inspiration to the rest of humanity.
Mother Teresa, according to historian Ruth Tucker, was the first religious
figure in history to be revered during her lifetime by Christians of all
denominations. If we decide, however, to examine the facts of Mother Teresa’s
life without the customary awe and reverence, we may see an entirely different
figure. In reality, the mainstream portrait of Mother Teresa is entirely at
odds with her actions and her own words. Saint Teresa of Calcutta, without
exaggeration, was a masochistic fraud whose work greatly increased the amount
of suffering in the world. Per her own words, she had no interest in
alleviating poverty or suffering. She took millions of dollars in donations,
managed it suspiciously, and did not spend it on the poor. She worked to
repair the reputations of political tyrants and increase her own fame. She was
dogmatically opposed to divorce, abortion, and the use of contraceptives, even
in the densely overpopulated country of India. If you were under the illusion
that she was a virtuous woman who dedicated her life to apolitical
humanitarian work, and that we should all venerate her regardless of our
religious views, I hope you can be disabused of the Myth of Mother Teresa.

This kind of bewilderingly slanted press coverage of Mother Teresa is
customary, and if you dare challenge it, prepare to be met with fury and wrath
from all quarters, as Hitchens and Dr. Chatterjee were. It simply does not
matter what she says or what is reported – no one’s opinion of her seems to
respond. Her sycophants will remain unfazed. Mother Teresa was once – and
still is, to a large extent – an unassailable figure. Her few public critics
were rewarded for their honesty and integrity with venomous public outrage.
Hitchens and Dr. Chatterjee’s early work did not earn them many friends.
However, over time, their account of Mother Teresa has survived the intense
scrutiny put upon it, and the weight of evidence continues to grow on the side
of those who see Mother Teresa for what she really was: a sadist and fraud.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F03%2F27%2Fthe-mother-teresa-myth%2F&signup_flow=account)

Schultz, Kai. “A Critic’s Lonely Quest: Revealing the Whole Truth About Mother
Teresa.” New York Times, 2016.

Tagged [aroup chatterjee](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aroup-
chatterjee/), [atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[catholic](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/catholic/),
[Catholicism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/catholicism/),
[chatterjee](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/chatterjee/),
[christopher hitchens](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christopher-
hitchens/),
[donations](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/donations/),
[Duvalier](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/duvalier/), [Duvalier
dictatorship](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/duvalier-
dictatorship/), [fraud](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fraud/),
[friend of poverty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/friend-of-
poverty/), [hitchens](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/hitchens/),
[keating](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/keating/), [medical
donations](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/medical-donations/),
[mother teresa](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-teresa/),
[mother teresa fraud](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-
teresa-fraud/), [mother teresa
myth](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-teresa-myth/), [mother
teresa sadist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-teresa-
sadist/),
[Muggeridge](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/muggeridge/),
[saint](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/saint/), [saint
teresa](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/saint-teresa/), [Serge
Larivée](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/serge-larivee/)

Mother Teresa accepted millions of dollars from Charles Keating, the savings-
and-loan fraud who made his money by stealing from the elderly. Over twenty
thousand people lost large sums of money as a result of Keating’s scams. A
significant portion of the victims lost their entire life savings, many of
them senior citizens. In return for the millions of dollars Mother Teresa
received from Keating (as well as the use of his private jet), Mother Teresa
gave him a trinket that she had “blessed”. When Keating’s fraud was exposed,
the courts asked her to return the money to whom it had been stolen. She
declined. Her letter, preserved by the California court to whom it was
addressed, read that she did not know anything about Keating’s fraud. She
said, “I only know that he has always been kind and generous to God’s poor,
and always ready to help whenever there was a need.” L. Seidman, the FDIC
chair at the time, later wrote that Keating’s scam was “one of the most
heartless and cruel frauds in modern memory.”

Mother Teresa kept dubious political contacts, to put it mildly. She praised
the Duvalier dictatorship in Haiti, a notoriously bloody and corrupt regime.
Under their decades-long rule, tens of thousands of Haitians were tortured and
killed, while hundreds of thousands fled and became refugees. At the time,
Haiti suffered the most crippling poverty in the Western Hemisphere, while the
Duvaliers maintained an opulent and lavish lifestyle at the expense of the
Haitian population under their rule. In 1980, in the midst of their brutal
dictatorship, Saint Teresa flew to Haiti and accepted a medal from President
Duvalier. She told bewildered reporters that she had “never seen the poor
people being so familiar with their head of state as they were with the
Duvaliers. […] It was a beautiful lesson for me. I’ve learned something from
it.”

In the year of our Lord 2022, Mother Teresa is somehow still seen as a person
who rose to the level of even a morally average person. A few years ago, we
discussed her unearned reputation on[ Counter
Apologetics](https://open.spotify.com/show/0xp05xgyg04BWh0U1tCZ0z?si=pOezmB_7QtGJNf8C_kGw0w&nd=1).
I wrote an updated version of the episode in 2019, and repost it here today to
remind you that if you’ve never supported a brutal Haitian dictatorship,
participated in “one of the most heartless and cruel frauds in modern memory,”
or campaigned to make divorce illegal, you’re a better person than Mother
Teresa.

Barton, Adriana. “Mother Teresa was ‘anything but a Saint,’ Canadian study
says.” The Globe and Mail. 2013.

In addition to Mother Teresa’s charitable work described thus far, she was
also a tireless opponent of women’s rights. She campaigned to keep divorce
illegal in Ireland, while simultaneously congratulating Princess Diana on her
divorce, publicly offering her well wishes. Apparently, a poor woman in
Ireland with a wife-beating husband can never hope for anything better. But a
wealthy, famous woman can divorce and receive Mother Teresa’s stamp of
approval. Thankfully, Mother Teresa failed in her efforts to force Catholic
morals on the entire population through the state, and now, women are legally
allowed to leave abusive relationships because she did not succeed.

Saint Teresa of Calcutta was born Anjezë Bojaxhiu (pronounced Agnus Boy-ah-
chew). She chose the name Teresa for herself, in honor of the patron saint of
missionaries, Thérèse de Lisieux. Missionary work was her true passion. She
used the millions of dollars in donations she received to build nunneries in
order to train more missionaries. Rather than use the millions at her disposal
to alleviate suffering and poverty, she spent most of her money on Catholic
missionary work. According to Serge Larivée, a researcher at the University of
Montreal, Mother Teresa only offered prayers and medallions of the Virgin Mary
to victims of natural disasters rather than any aid, monetary or otherwise.

Though she often denied basic medical treatment to those under her care, she
never spared any expense for her own health. For example, she received the
best western medicine and treatment available for her heart problems.

Dr. Aroup Chatterjee, having worked under Mother Teresa, was baffled and
frustrated upon moving to the United Kingdom in 1985 when he discovered the
saintly reputation she had acquired in the West. Dr. Chatterjee conducted
hundreds of hours of interviews with nuns and volunteers, discovering that
Mother Teresa’s practices were even worse than he had witnessed during his
tenure. Despite her clinics receiving millions of dollars in donations, their
conditions were appalling. Needles were routinely reused with no
sterilization. There was a disturbing lack of actual medical care and basic
nutrition, as well as a seemingly intentional lack of painkillers. Many of her
victim-residents laid in agony in hammocks or stretcher beds, many with shaved
heads. According to Chatterjee, friends and family members were often
prohibited from visiting the afflicted residents, which is highly unusual.
Blankets stained with feces were washed in the same sink used to clean dishes,
and residents were forced to defecate in the presence of one another.

It’s entirely possible that the public doesn’t want to be disillusioned. Some
have speculated that her mythos soothes our first-world guilt. “The rich world
has a poor conscience,” Hitchens observed. “It wants, in fact, it needs, to
think that someone, somewhere, is doing something about the third world, and
the Mother Teresa myth ministers to this desire.” The press, with few
exceptions, is highly complicit in the perpetuation of her reputation. An
article from the Washington Post used the phrase “frugality and simplicity” to
describe the reuse, without sterilization, of hypodermic needles and
facilities that required patients to defecate in front of one another.

Taylor, Adam. “Why Mother Teresa is still no saint to many of her critics.”
The Washington Post, 2016.

Kodak manufactured film that worked in the dark, and a superstitious director,
unaware of this, attributed something he couldn’t explain to the divine. The
news of the first television miracle spread like wildfire. From there, Mother
Teresa’s media appearances increased. For the last few decades of her life,
you could find her touring the world in private jets and helicopters,
appearing with TV stars and powerful figures, basking in the spotlight and
raking in donations that never went to the poor.

If she had no interest in aiding the poor, alleviating suffering, helping
women, or anything beyond fame and missionary work, how was the Mother Teresa
myth generated to begin with? Her first taste of the media spotlight came in
the form of a 1969 BBC program entitled Something Beautiful for God, directed
by Malcolm Muggeridge. The film and subsequent book portrayed Mother Teresa in
the way we’ve all come to expect – a humble, solemn servant of God and the
poor.

One passage of the letter to Moore echoes Rosa Luxemburg’s famous “socialism
or barbarism” slogan:

In these letters from the last several years of his life, his notorious racism
seems to fade, and he explicitly rejects the reactionary, fascistic political
ideology he held prior to 1931. He ruthlessly critiques capitalism, speaks
glowingly of Marx, and warns us that our only options are socialism or
barbarism.

Nothing like a bit of biological essentialism to let you know the old
Lovecraft is still there somewhere. Though it should be noted that he goes on
to disparage the KKK as “backward fundamentalists”.

According to Lovecraft, the blame for the deteriorating influence of
“commercialism” on the human psyche and the quality of art cannot be solely
attributed to the impulses of a few bad apples. The “greed-breeding
capitalistic order” will never fail to generate and reward those actors, so,
they will continue to “work the poor devils as cheaply as possible (throwing
’em out to starve when they’re superfluous), & cash in on their present
dwarfed tastes & faculties…”

> “Actually, there are many persons of the highest character & most impeccable
> background who honestly think that a general communistic programme forms the
> only ultimate solution of the present breakdown of capitalism—a belief which
> they derive from the abstract & impersonal study of national resources &
> their distribution; & which does not, of course, necessarily involve any
> endorsement of the sudden social changes & absurd formal *ideologies*
> advocated by the orthodox Marxians & discontented European riffraff. Such
> persons do not wish to see all traditions & settled ways of living ripped up
> indiscriminately, but they do feel that mankind will not be able to continue
> its civilisation unless its stagnating inequalities of resources &
> opportunities are eventually diminished through some far-sighted plan of
> distribution & some adequate way of enforcing that plan. To them, some sort
> of communism (in each case suited to the history & traditions of the race
> involved) seems the only way to enforce a civilization-preserving economic
> plan—hence they believe it will have to come in the end … The number of
> these honest & analytical communists or semi-communists seems vastly on the
> increase…”

Personally, I don’t want to live in a world where every movie is a Christian
movie, and every moviegoer is an old church lady. I don’t think every work of
art is supposed to be a moral or ideological vehicle whose purpose is to
effect positive change. Though this would be an augmentation of every awful
trend that we’ve witnessed over the past decade, it seems to be the implicit
desire of many, if not the explicit goal.

Occasionally, his fans will step out on a limb, defending aspects of his
character. [Patton Oswalt once suggested](https://youtu.be/t2DPGROfCsQ?t=2392)
that Lovecraft, had he been given the chance to grow old, may have matured in
his old age. Perhaps he would’ve become an even worse crank, but there’s a
chance he would’ve swerved in the other direction—his introspective and hyper-
critical nature would cause personal evolution eventually.

> “Industry should be socialised by degrees, & only as soon as the mass of the
> people are ready to back up the various absorptive moves. The government
> must dictate hours & wages, & see that employment is universally spread. If
> private industry can meet such rigidly enforced demands, well & good. If
> not—& it probably can’t—absorption will be in order.”

The politics of H.P. Lovecraft (1890-1937) have always been considered a
liability by those who appreciate his body of work. So, upon reading a few of
his letters from the final seven years of his life, I was surprised by what I
discovered. Lovecraft’s radical political transformation in 1931, so at odds
with the man that many know as H.P. Lovecraft, is a chapter of the writer’s
life even many aficionados seem to be unfamiliar with.

Based on these late-period letters I’ve been reading, Oswalt may have been on
to something. Lovecraft explicitly repudiated fascism, renouncing many of his
reactionary political views following a dramatic political transformation
beginning in the 1930s. To my surprise, he turned against capitalism. In fact,
if you can believe it, he was an ardent socialist by the time he died.

Make no mistake, it’s not as if he became a man of the people, and he
certainly did not have any sympathy for the Soviet Union. (Though, neither did
Emma Goldman or Noam Chomsky, both socialists.) This 1934 letter to Barlow
isn’t quite as stark as his 1937 letter to Moore, and the hostility of Barlow
to socialism of any kind had him seeming almost apologetic.

He’s in favor of gradual socialization rather than violent revolution, and he
pokes fun at Marxists (who hasn’t?).

This [letter to Catherine Moore](https://github.com/punchmonster/Lovecraft-
Letters/blob/master/19370207-Catherine-L-Moore.md), written in the final year
of his life, is an incredible document for a fan of Lovecraft. To hear him
rail against “plutocracy” and capitalism is quite interesting, not to mention
his explicit repudiation of his younger self, which most of his fans conceive
to _be Lovecraft._

Recently I learned that H.P. Lovecraft had undergone a surprising and dramatic
political transformation in the final years of his brief life. I wanted to
read a few of Lovecraft’s letters and discuss his views on capitalism,
socialism, & the influence of the profit motive on artistic expression.

> “The war between honest human expression & the profit motive is eternal &
> truceless.”

Finding aesthetic value apart from political and moral ideology, however, is a
necessary skill. If we don’t nurture this ability, what will be left? How many
artists live up to your moral and political standards? And why would one
deprive oneself in this way?

Can we form an absolute division between art and artist? Probably not, and
certainly not in the case of Lovecraft. _Who he is_ matters. His own fragile,
paranoid, and diseased mental state shades the mental states of his victim-
protagonists, the character of his mythos, and the narrative arcs of his
stories. At least in some sense, “separating the art from the artist” is not
even desirable. (For more details regarding his inner life, see [the section
on Lovecraft’s biography.](https://youtu.be/t2DPGROfCsQ?t=459) He seemed
socially stunted, and suffered from a unique set of anxieties and various
abnormalities.)

Like other Lovecraft fans, I’ve tried to learn to separate aesthetic value
from moral value. Lovecraft was a reactionary and a white supremacist. This
can be detected in his work—sometimes it’s subtle, sometimes it’s staring you
right in the face. Nevertheless, he’s a literary genius and one of the
greatest horror authors of all time.

> “The only avenue of survival for plutocracy is a military & emotional
> fascism whereby millions of persons will be withdrawn from the industrial
> arena & placed on a dole or in concentration-camps with high-sounding
> patriotic names. That or socialism—take your choice.”

Perhaps he saw clearly what was to come. In the endless barrage of superhero
movies, lowest-common-denominator entertainment, and the death of mid-budget
movies, Lovecraft’s rants seem prophetic. “Bourgeois capitalism gave artistic
excellence & sincerity a deathblow,” he wrote, “by enthroning cheap amusement-
value at the expense of that intrinsic excellence…”

> “The nations of Scandinavia form a very hopeful sign—for there the
> plutocrats are gradually backing down under the combined pressure of
> increased government supervision & the competing system of consumers’
> coöperatives. England is also well on the way. The United States has the
> handicap of a lawless pioneer tradition which exalts in individual gain to a
> grotesque extent—but even here the Northern-European temperament has
> softened the savagery of reaction.”

Fair warning, those who would like to be spared culture war ranting should
skip to the next section where we get to the letters. This is relevant to
Lovecraft, for reasons that will become obvious, if they aren’t already. In my
first episode about Lovecraft, originally published a couple years back, I
briefly complained about a terrible shift in our cultural ethos, and I’ll be
expanding on those thoughts a bit. So, those who are just reading to hear
Lovecraft’s recently uncovered letters…you might just skip this next part. The
bottom line is that you can adore an artist’s work without it being diminished
by moral or ideological concerns. And further, that this is in every sense a
much better ethos than what currently is the norm, set by the secular
counterparts of church ladies.

> “A few can reason, & can see that capitalism is automatically doomed by the
> natural course of economics unless upheld by fascist bayonets.”

Though he never explicitly renounces his racist views (at least, not anywhere
that I’ve found), they seem to be part of the reactionary package that he does
reject by name. In his letters, his prolific usage of racial slurs tapirs off,
and his expressions of racist ideas fade from sight. You’ll find that his most
reactionary writings were produced in the 1910’s and the ‘20s. That period of
his life is the man that most people simply know as Lovecraft. But in the
1930s, the rougher edges appear to have been sanded off. I don’t want to
overstate his evolution, but many of his reactionary views did not seem to
follow him into the ‘30s.

So why bother talking about the nuances of Lovecraft’s character, and even
defending him, if I’m arguing that it ultimately doesn’t matter? Well, first
off, to ask a fan of Lovecraft why they’d be interested in minutia surrounding
the artist’s life and work is to utterly fail to understand fans of Lovecraft
and their affliction. Second, I think it vindicates a few of us, like Oswalt,
who had supposed that we had detected some redeeming qualities in him. Though,
let me concede once again that it ultimately doesn’t matter: his improved
character doesn’t make me enjoy his work any more or less. Nonetheless, it is
an interesting turn of events for Lovecraft readers and fans. It’s certainly a
chapter of his life that many don’t seem to know about. That his politics in
his later years before he died at age 46 were so radically different from
those of the younger man who most consider to _be_ Lovecraft is an interesting
biographical item in itself.

I think we must try to learn to separate aesthetic value from moral or
political value. If we don’t learn to separate artistic quality and moral
quality, the results will be predictable. Every movie will become a secular
version of a Christian movie—all the masterful filmmaking skill we see on
display in Christian movies, just promoting different values. Every analysis
will be that of a secular church lady who says, “This was good because it
affirms my moral beliefs, but that was bad because it doesn’t affirm my moral
beliefs.” “Because that author was racist, his fiction sucks.” “Because that
comedian did something bad, he’s no longer funny.” “Because this movie depicts
something morally impermissible, it’s a terrible movie.” “Because someone used
bad words, this is a bad work of art—doesn’t matter if it was the creator or a
character in the story.” I’ve even heard, “This comedy special isn’t any good
because it doesn’t help advance positive social change.”

I drew from three of his correspondences: one in 1934, 1936, and 1937. The
1937 letter, written to Catherine Moore, is the one in which his socialism is
most strident, least apologetic, and most consistent. (Whereas, in his 1934
letter, for instance, his political ideology seems muddled and incoherent.)
Were you to only read one of his letters, his 1937 letter, written in the year
of his death, is the one.

Lovecraft’s objection to capitalism was not just economic, but moral and
aesthetic. He saw the conflict between artistic excellence and a capitalistic
order, and he argued that the privately-controlled, free market economy would
turn us into the worst versions of ourselves.

> “And when bourgeois capitalism found it profitable to reach down to the
> still-submerged elements & cater to their crippled, repressed, & grotesquely
> unformed tastes … this huge market merely aggravated the trend away from
> real excellence towards showmanship & charlatanry. The suave bosses of a
> business ‘civilisation’ have no wish to improve the masses—rather the
> reverse.”

> “I read the old *Communist Manifesto* many years ago; & even though then
> wholly out of sympathy with it, was impressed by some of the isolated points
> it brought out. Today I would sympathise on more counts—but even so, would
> not give it a 100% endorsement. There is no question of the vast
> intelligence & far-sightedness of Marx & Engels, & of the basic importance
> of the large economic principles they discovered & formulated. The only
> mistake is to think that every ramification they developed, & every
> inference they drew, is infallibly accurate & worthy of slavishly literal
> following under every conceivable set of circumstances. The major discovery
> as to general drift is sound … Some people seem never able to realise that
> no great discovery comes forth without attendant clouds of error & half
> truth.”

Lovecraft goes on a long rant in [his letter to
Moore](https://github.com/punchmonster/Lovecraft-
Letters/blob/master/19370207-Catherine-L-Moore.md) about the corrosive effects
of the profit motive on art. Though he was never able to make a decent living
on his fiction (he was the quintessential starving artist), he mentions in a
letter that lack of decent pay would ward off the “mercenaries,” and only
leave the true lovers of the “weird” remaining.

Here is where I and those who have disagreed with me thus far can at least
find some common ground. This is our situation: we cannot fully separate art
from artist, in some sense. Nor should we. Those who make movies and books and
shows we love will always be of some interest to us, as will their intent.
(It’s an ironic fact that many conservatives who think authorial intent is
paramount also emphatically demand that we separate art from artist.) In any
event, we must separate our moral judgement from our aesthetic judgement. Why
should artists be role models? And why should every _character_ be a role
model? This carving must be further applied to the behavior of those in the
book, movie, show, etc. “Protagonist” doesn’t mean “good guy, who you’re
supposed to side with, who does good things for good reasons.” (Though it does
in Christian movies and Ayn Rand novels.) Moral condemnation of the behavior
of characters in a work of fiction shouldn’t translate to aesthetic
condemnation. Many of those who seem to want every movie to be a Christian
movie or an Ayn Rand novel inserted with different values are utterly unable
to see anything on screen endorsed or depicted that they find morally
objectionable. If we can’t find a way to outgrow this stupidity…well, I hope
you like Christian movies.

> “Capitalism is dying from internal as well as external causes, & its own
> leaders & beneficiaries are less & less able to kid themselves. I’m no
> economist, but from recent reading I’ve been able to form a rough picture of
> the dilemma—the need to restrict consumers’ goods & to pile up a needless
> plethora of producing equipment in order to maintain the irrational surplus
> called profit—which has caused orthodox economists like Hayek & Robbins to
> admit that only starvation wages & artificial scarcity could stabilize the
> profit system in future & avert increasing cyclical depressions of utterly
> destructive scope. Laissez-faire capitalism is dead—make no mistake about
> that. The only avenue of survival for plutocracy is a military & emotional
> fascism whereby millions of persons will be withdrawn from the industrial
> arena & placed on a dole or in concentration-camps with high-sounding
> patriotic names. That or socialism—take your choice. … All this from an
> antiquated mummy who was on the other side until 1931! Well—I can better
> understand the inert blindness & defiant ignorance of the reactionaries from
> having been one of them. I know how smugly ignorant I was…”

His harshest words in this letter are for capitalism, which he describes as a
“crazy orgy” of “legalised” corruption. Under capitalism, he writes, “the
chief corruption is actually legalised under the name of private profit”.

> “I can’t see that socialism would hurt anybody who is willing to work & who
> expects a just return from the work he performs—including guarantees of
> proper security in old age & in times of necessary unemployment or
> disability.”

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F10%2F18%2Fh-p-lovecrafts-1931-radical-political-transformation%2F&signup_flow=account)

  1. Pingback: [CA92 The Meager Moral Fruits Argument | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/03/28/ca92-the-meager-moral-fruits-argument/)

**The Empirical Premise** is meant to establish some relevant fact about the
world. (For example, “Christianity has historically been an obstacle to LGBT
equality.”)

Tagged [abductive](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/abductive/),
[apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument/), [argument
against theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-against-
theism/), [atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [cumulative
case](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/cumulative-case/),
[draper](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/draper/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/),
[inductive](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/inductive/), [meager
moral fruit](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruit/),
[meager moral fruit
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruit-
argument/), [meager moral fruit of
theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruit-of-
theism/), [meager moral
fruits](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruits/),
[meager moral fruits
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruits-
argument/), [meager moral fruits of
theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruits-of-
theism/), [meagre moral fruit
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meagre-moral-fruit-
argument/), [meagre moral
fruits](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meagre-moral-fruits/), [mmf
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mmf-argument/), [paul
draper](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/paul-draper/), [what if I
stumble](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/what-if-i-stumble/)

There’s much more to say about this argument than we cover today, but we
manage to lay out the essential core of the argument: the Theological Premise,
the Empirical Premise, and the Moral Premise. The Theological Premise is,
roughly speaking, the claim that Christianity should bear appreciable moral
fruit, and that Christian theism and naturalism make different predictions:
they lead us to form different expectations about the world. The Empirical
Premise is meant to establish some relevant fact about the world. The Moral
Premise affirms a moral fact or normative judgment. We defend each of these
premises and work the meager moral fruits argument into a cumulative case for
naturalism.

**The Theological Premise** , roughly speaking, is the claim that Christianity
should bear moral fruit. (For example, “Christianity should be an aid to the
pursuit of the good for oneself and for others, not an obstacle.”)

Does Christianity bear the kind of fruit one might expect if it were true?
Does naturalism or Christian theism better predict the moral fruits and lack
thereof that we actually observe? Naturalists would expect Christianity to
produce a mixed bag, like any other man-made institution. Christianity leads
one to form loftier expectations.

Does Christianity bear the kinds of moral fruit one might expect if it were
true? Does naturalism or Christian theism better predict the moral fruits and
lack thereof that we actually observe?

So let’s lay this out in a general abductive form, since we’ll probably want
to factor the MMF argument into a cumulative case for naturalism. For
simplicity’s sake, we should lump together the moral claim and empirical
claim, and label those the “meager moral fruits” in question. The conjunct of
our empirical judgment and moral judgment _is_ the data – the meager moral
fruits – that we’re trying to explain.

Not all versions of the MMF argument will follow the pattern of defending a
theological, empirical, _and_ moral premise. I think a theological and
empirical premise are both essential to the MMF argument, but the moral
premise isn’t _always_ there. For instance, one might defend a theological
premise along the lines of “Christianity does not predict that Christians
would be indistinguishable from non-Christians,” and an empirical premise like
“Christians and non-Christians are not appreciably different in their conduct
and character.” So there’s no moral premise in that argument, even though it’s
still recognizably a meager moral fruits argument. However, every MMF argument
will involve a theological and empirical claim, explicitly or implicitly.
Pushback against the argument will typically involve a rejection of the
theological, empirical, or (if it has one) moral premise.

Putting those three together, one has a version of the meager moral fruits
argument. We could switch out any of those three claims, substituting
different versions of the theological premise or focusing on different
empirical claims or moral issues.

> “I might believe in the Redeemer if his followers looked more redeemed.”
>
> Nietzsche

My favorite version of the MMF argument begins with the claim that, if true,
Christianity should not be an obstacle to the pursuit of the good for oneself
and for others. It should be a help, not a hindrance. The judgment of which it
is – aid or obstacle – will be person-dependent, based on the evidence they
have available to them. It’s inevitable that everyone listening to this –
regardless of your religious persuasion – will have to make moral and
empirical judgments based on your unique position on the grand epistemic
landscape. And it’s you, as an individual, who has to make the decision to be
a part of Christianity or not.

This unfortunately doesn’t stop many from dismissively rejecting the argument
because Christianity teaches that we’re fallen creatures, depraved sinners in
need of redemption. But there are limits. It would be quite bizarre for a
Christian to maintain that the predictions of naturalism and the predictions
of Christian theism are in perfect alignment on the issue of moral fruits. In
order to reject the theological premise, one would have to maintain that Jesus
offers no transformational power, the influence of the Spirit has zero
tangible effect, and cutting oneself off from God – the foundation of goodness
itself – has no influence over moral conduct and character. Is that what
Christians ordinarily teach?

The data that we’re trying to explain – the meager moral fruits in question –
can be hard to pin down. As is often the case in philosophy, the argument is
really a family of arguments. So, the specific meager moral fruits may shift
from argument to argument, just as the specific form of evil shifts when
discussing the various arguments from evil. A given meager moral fruits
argument may invoke the fact that Christian practice is often an obstacle to
pursuing the good for oneself and others. Its focus may be Christian history,
objectionable moral doctrines, social policies, and political influence of
Christian institutions. What you’d like to focus on is a matter of choice.

Critics of this argument will sometimes resist the theological premise,
somewhat desperately, and go so far as to deny that we should expect
Christians to stand out from non-Christians. This expectation, however, is not
something atheists are pulling out of thin air – this is what my Christian
community expected _of itself_! In my Protestant environment, faith over works
was the standard view. But works, I was taught, arose naturally when one’s
heart had truly been given over to God. Failing to bear these fruits or
continuing in a life of sin was a definite sign that the Spirit was not in
control – the Holy Spirit was not really having an influence over your life.
If one had sincerely given your life over to Christ, one would see a
difference manifest. Lack of moral and spiritual fruit was an ominous sign.

Why is it the case that the data we’re trying to explain are more expected on
naturalism and more surprising on Christian theism? It comes down to the
theological premise – the question of whether Christianity is supposed to bear
moral fruits. The theological premise is built into Christian theism, but
obviously not into naturalism. On naturalism, we would expect religion, like
all other man-made institutions, to be sometimes a help in the pursuit of the
good, sometimes a hindrance. Many of those who have left the Christian faith
have done so because Christianity was not enabling them to pursue the good for
themselves or others. Of course, this is quite surprising on Christianity.
(Are we really going to assert that Christianity being _an obstacle to
pursuing the good_ is not in dramatic conflict with the self-image of
Christianity?) Naturalists, on the other hand, have good reason to expect a
mixed bag. Like all other human institutions, we’d expect Christianity to be
sometimes an aid, sometimes an obstacle to the pursuit of the good for oneself
and others. Since this is what we observe, we can take this fact to be
evidence favoring naturalism over Christian theism.

Christianity is not endlessly flexible when accounting for meager moral
fruits. Christianity doesn’t predict that Christians would be _perfect_ (no
one is saying that it does), but it definitely does not predict that
Christians would be morally indistinguishable from non-Christians, let alone
worse. Believers claim that the power of Jesus is transformative, that the
Spirit yields different actions than the flesh. Some even claim that atheists
cannot be moral. Well, if that’s the case, then there ought to be pretty
noticeable moral fruits! As Steve Baughman put it, “This is one of the few
testable claims Christianity makes. If being a ‘new creature’ in Christ means
anything, it means being significantly different from us old creatures.”

The theological premise – the foundation of the MMF argument – is usually
pretty defensible. ([Here, Trent Horn doesn’t even try to reject the
theological premise – he instead pushes back on the empirical and moral
premises](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w1Tp7gDzevk).) Its support is found
in scripture and tradition and common sense. There’s a clear basis for
believing that the moral conduct of Christians and non-Christians should not
be indistinguishable. That would be an example of a potential theological
premise. Another candidate would be “Theism should be an aid, not an obstacle
to the pursuit of the good for oneself and for others.” Christianity should
not impair your ability to live a moral life. If Christianity is true, we
should expect it to have the opposite effect. Couple that with an empirical
claim like “Christians have by and large been an obstacle to equality for the
LGBT community” and a moral claim like “Equality for the LGBT community would
be a moral good” and you’ve got an argument from meager moral fruits.
Incidentally, one that has had a dramatic effect over millennials and gen-z.
(I lean on the example of LGBT equality for the sake of ease: we have a solid
moral _and_ empirical premise. Yet many Christians remain content to position
themselves against LGBT social and legal equality – they’re proud to be wrong
about this.)

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F03%2F17%2Fthe-meager-moral-fruits-argument%2F&signup_flow=account)

**The Moral Premise** affirms a moral fact or normative judgment. (For
example, “LGBT equality would be a moral good.”)

> (1) Pr(meager moral fruits | Naturalism) = n
>
> (2) Pr(meager moral fruits | Christian Theism) = <n
>
> (3) Therefore, Pr(meager moral fruits | Naturalism) > Pr(meager moral fruits
> | Christian Theism)
>
> (4) Therefore, meager moral fruits constitute evidence favoring Naturalism
> over Theism.

There are three moving parts of the MMF argument, so critiques of the argument
will _tend_ to fall into one of three categories: criticism of the theological
premise, the empirical premise, or the moral premise.

In English, premise one is just the probability that we would make some
observation if naturalism were true. That exact likelihood may be hard to
determine, but that doesn’t matter. We can be much more confident of its value
_relative to_ a competing theistic hypothesis (in this case, Christianity). We
don’t need to assign exact numerical assessments as long as we can assign
comparative values. So if the probability of a given observation on naturalism
is n, the probability of that same observation on Christian theism is _less
than_ n. Therefore, our observation constitutes evidence against Christian
theism.

According to the [Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2017/11/27/views-of-transgender-issues-divide-along-religious-lines/),
views of transgender issues (unsurprisingly) divide along religious lines.
(There was and still is a similar divide over gay rights.) Atheists are not
just one of the most progressive demographics on trans issues; we’re _the_
most progressive demographic. If one considers support for LGBT equality to be
a moral good, then the MMF applies in full force. If one considers LGBT people
to be in a state of terrible sin, then the comparative lack of religious
support isn’t a moral failing – exactly the opposite. Disagreement over what
is or isn’t morally good complicates the MMF argument – running it will be
much easier if the disagreement is resolved first. …which means that many
presentations of the MMF argument will end up mired in debates over ethical
and political issues.

Some Christians might insist on missing the point of the argument by reminding
us that even demons believe in God, which means we shouldn’t expect belief in
God to always bear fruit. But the argument isn’t really about “believing in
God”, full stop. It’s about _following_ God, following his commands, being in
a personal relationship with God, being led by the Spirit and not just the
flesh, bearing the fruits that the Bible says you’ll bear, being transformed
by the power of Christ. This is about the expectations that Christians have
_of themselves_ – _given_ their beliefs – and whether those expectations are
panning out.

The late Ravi Zacharias said that the question that haunted him the most
throughout his ministry was presented by a Hindu acquaintance: “If this
conversion you speak about is truly supernatural, then why is it not more
evident in the lives of so many Christians that I know?” In other words, a God
who is said to transform should produce followers with transformed lives.
Naturalism leads one to form less lofty expectations.

Christianity may have resources for explaining its lack of fruit, but
establishing that there is no logical incompatibility here (as theists are
capable of doing) is not the same thing as making the respective probabilities
equal. This point is worth repeating: explaining some observation without
logical contradiction is not a very high bar. Clearing it certainly does not
mean that our observations are equiprobable on naturalism and on theism.
Everyone involved can offer a coherent explanation of our observations, but
that doesn’t mean the evidence doesn’t favor one hypothesis over another.

The moral premise is, by my lights, where the most trouble is liable to occur.
I think the theological claim, properly stated, is the least controversial.
The empirical claim can cause difficulty as well, depending on what sort of
empirical claim you’re making. But I think the biggest potential difficulty
lies with the moral premise.

Here, it comes down to how confident one is in a given moral issue. Some
values are uncontroversial, such as generosity, kindness, and not punching
babies. But these widely-accepted morals create unique empirical problems. How
could we know which religious demographics are…kinder? And we don’t collect
data on baby-punching. We have plenty of data on a range of social and moral
issues – on LGBT equality, for example. On that subject, the empirical premise
is solid. The moral premise will receive pushback, but there’s no question
that Christianity was (and still is) an obstacle to LGBT equality. So to
whatever extent you’re confident that LGBT equality would be a good thing,
that’s the confidence with which you can issue that version of the MMF
argument.

No defender of [the meager moral fruits (MMF)
argument](https://youtu.be/q5Kq-73HfWk) takes it to decisively refute the
truth of Christian theism, since there is no logical incompatibility between
meager moral fruits and the truth of Christianity. Rather, it’s _evidence
against_ Christianity; it _lowers the probability_ of Christianity. It’s an
argument that’s best utilized in a cumulative case. There’s also a
pragmatic/existential argument from meager moral fruits, and a hortatory
version of the argument (intended to inspire action), but we’ll leave those to
one side for now.

We would never expect the moral fruits of theism to be meager at best, given
the dramatic claims that apologists often make about the connection between
Christianity and goodness itself. To be sure, some degree of moral failure and
meager fruit is easily accounted for by the Christian worldview. But for
doctrinal reasons, scriptural reasons, and to some extent, common sense,
Christianity is not limitlessly flexible in accounting for its meager moral
fruits. If it was, it would make no strong predictions about the
transformative power of Christ, the fruits of the Spirit, and the connection
between Christianity and the good itself. Christianity does make such claims,
which is why meager moral fruits are better explained by naturalism.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2019%2F03%2F21%2Fthe-mother-teresa-myth-2%2F&signup_flow=account)

A few years ago, we discussed Mother Teresa’s unearned reputation on Counter
Apologetics. I wrote an updated version of the episode in 2019, and [reposted
it here](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/2022/03/27/the-mother-teresa-
myth/) to remind you that if you’ve never supported a brutal Haitian
dictatorship, participated in “one of the most heartless and cruel frauds in
modern memory,” or campaigned to make divorce illegal, you’re a better person
than Mother Teresa.

Tagged [aroup chatterjee](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aroup-
chatterjee/), [atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[catholic](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/catholic/), [charles
keating](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/charles-keating/),
[chatterjee](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/chatterjee/),
[christopher hitchens](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christopher-
hitchens/),
[donations](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/donations/),
[Duvalier](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/duvalier/), [Duvalier
dictatorship](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/duvalier-
dictatorship/), [fraud](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fraud/),
[friend of poverty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/friend-of-
poverty/), [haiti](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/haiti/),
[hitchens](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/hitchens/),
[keating](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/keating/), [medical
practices](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/medical-practices/),
[mother teresa](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-teresa/),
[mother teresa fraud](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-
teresa-fraud/), [mother teresa
myth](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-teresa-myth/), [mother
teresa sadist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-teresa-
sadist/),
[Muggeridge](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/muggeridge/),
[saint](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/saint/), [Serge
Larivée](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/serge-larivee/)

This is actually similar to the “god is love” quotes all over the place. I
have yet to see where, but his reputation among believers in quite
unbelievable. God was a thug in the Bible.

[Walden Pod](https://audioboom.com/channels/4990493) is a philosophy, science,
and culture podcast. Consciousness comes up a lot.

[Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/) is a podcast
about atheism and apologetics. Over the life of the podcast, it’s become
increasingly focused on the philosophy of religion.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2Fabout%2F&signup_flow=account)

Say that [determinism](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/determinism-causal/)
turns out to be true. Everything can, in principle, be explained – everything
has a sufficient reason for being as it is and not otherwise. Every event in
consciousness and the physical world is determined by the concatenation of
antecedent events, conditions, and laws of nature.

This distinction comes in handy when we’re discussing “ought implies can.” If
determinism is true, then both P1 and P2 are false, in some sense. But we can
easily imagine rolling a 1 (in fact, Dan has done it before). He couldn’t
have, however, rolled a 0. Likewise, he can’t end world hunger, and is thus
not obligated to end world hunger. Ought implies can. But given the
opportunity to feed the hungry, he could’ve taken the opportunity even though
he failed this time (in fact, he’s done it before). Dan is free of the
obligation to end world hunger, but still feels a pang of conscience about
failing to feed the hungry when given the opportunity. And for some strange
reason, he finds no comfort in the truth of determinism. I would say he’s
right to feel that way – he could’ve fed the hungry, and he should’ve.

Further, there’s still a distinction between **voluntary and involuntary
action, intentional and unintentional, approval and disapproval of first-order
desires, ordinary and extraordinary circumstances, reason-responsiveness and
non-reason-responsiveness**. That’s all still there even given determinism.

In some sense, both statements are false. But I think they’re clearly not
false _in the same way_. P1 is epistemically possible, and P2 is not possible
in any sense. With regards to P1, things really might have been otherwise.
People roll 1s all the time! And prior to rolling the die, we don’t know if
Dan will roll a 1. But we know they won’t roll a 0. I think there are plenty
of analogies when it comes to epistemic possibility in the realm of human
action. Dan might feed the hungry, or he might not. He’s done both in the
past, as have many others. However, he’s never eliminated world hunger, nor
could he.

Determinism, as I mentioned, doesn’t necessarily entail a denial of your
agency. I’m sure there are dumb versions of determism that deny your conscious
agency, but mine certainly doesn’t. Determinists don’t all hold that your
feeling of agency is just an illusion. Why does it feel like you have some
control over what you do? Because you do. Why does it feel like you’re
choosing what to do, and making decisions that determine your behavior?
Because you are. Why does it feel like my conscious intention to do x caused
my doing x? Because that really is what happened! Again, I don’t claim to
speak for all determinists. But I believe in mental causation; I think some
mental states are causally efficacious. It’s up to you at this moment to do
what you will do. Compatibilists can affirm this.

> (P1) Dan could’ve rolled a 1.
>
> (P2) Dan could’ve rolled a 0.

Determinism doesn’t take away the power of your will, or mean there’s no
difference between a strong will and a weak will. It just means that your will
is one of those dominos in the causal chain. Determinism doesn’t strip you of
your agency or mean the same future will unfold regardless of what you do –
that only follows from a naive understanding of determinism. Your agency still
makes a difference. But you and your agency come in a context. You’re not a
_causa sui_ actor who floats free of the causal web. You’ve only been stripped
of freedom of the will in the superlative metaphysical sense, which you
couldn’t have had anyway, regardless of determinism, dualism, or anything
else. Our decisions will determine the character of the future. Since we don’t
know which future will come to pass, and since our conscious agency plays a
crucial role in determining what will come to pass, it is of profound
importance how we use our conscious agency.

What else remains in place? Our conscious agency still plays a direct causal
role in determining what will happen next. It does not follow from determinism
that the same future will unfold regardless of what we do.

Given what we’ve talked about so far – that there are still virtuous and non-
virtuous people, still a moral law to be followed or broken, suffering to be
diminished, standards by which we can judge actions and people, a distinction
between acts performed voluntarily, intentionally, with approval of first-
order desires under ordinary conditions and acts that were not, and given that
there is still conscious agency and a will that plays a crucial role in causal
history – this is where I turn to free will skeptics and libertarians and ask,
“What more do you want? Has anything actually changed?”

Regardless, we do not have what Strawson calls “heaven and hell
responsibility.” Even with libertarian free will, it’s not clear that anyone
would deserve eternal conscious torment. The supposed consequences of
libertarian freedom drawn out by its defenders frequently do not follow from
the mere existence of libertarian free will. (This is part of why I question
whether it matters much if we possess libertarian freedom.) For instance,
eternal conscious torment or the death penalty are not justified purely in
virtue of the existence of libertarian free will.

Tagged
[compatibilism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/compatibilism/),
[compatibilist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/compatibilist/),
[dan dennett free will](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/dan-
dennett-free-will/), [daniel dennett free
will](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/daniel-dennett-free-will/),
[determinism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/determinism/),
[determinist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/determinist/), [free
will](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/free-will/), [freedom of the
will](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/freedom-of-the-will/), [galen
strawson free will](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/galen-strawson-
free-will/), [libertarian free
will](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/libertarian-free-will/),
[moral responsibility](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-
responsibility/)

For these reasons, we can still have good and evil, love and hate, praise and
blame, reward and punishment.

Is it true that such a world would preclude the existence of free will? Or at
least, free will in any meaningful sense of the term? Most philosophers would
say no, but if I had to guess, most non-philosophers would probably disagree.

Lately I’ve been trying to defend a compatibilist notion of “could’ve done
otherwise” that’s rooted in epistemic possibility. Say we need randomness or
indeterminacy in some form for freedom. Well, we can have randomness or
indeterminacy in some form: dice rolls are random, coin flips are random, and
so on. A Laplacean demon would know the outcome, but it’s nonetheless random
and indeterminate as far as we’re concerned. So epistemic indeterminacy, as
I’m calling it, is a kind that’s compatible with determinism. There’s a deeper
sense of indeterminacy in which even a Laplacean demon wouldn’t know the
outcome, but what I’m arguing is that we don’t need that deeper sense. (In
fact, I think we could simply reject the notion of “could’ve done otherwise”
entirely, but let’s say we want to preserve it in some form.) So there are
alternative possibilities open to us. Whether they count as “actual” or
“genuine” possibilities is a subtlety that I want to explore here.

I don’t understand how anyone can be satisfied with calling that “Free Will”.
We have *exactly* the same kind of “Free Will” as any other physical object,
the only difference is the *feeling* of freely choosing, and perhaps the
incredible organized complexity of our brains and bodies. Where is the freedom
in that?

Given everything I’ve said so far, it seems that it would be misleading to say
that I _don’t_ believe in free will. Yet, one could accuse me of revisionism.
The concept of free will, the libertarian (and free will skeptic) might
object, has been mutilated past the point of recognition. I’m just changing
the subject! I would argue that while my compatibilism is, to some extent, a
revisionary project, (most if not all) compatibilist notions of freedom are
_close enough_ to the original that we are not simply changing the subject. At
least one element has been removed – a non-essential element – but many others
remain in place. Anyone concerned with freedom will take note of at least
_some_ of the conditions mentioned earlier – voluntary vs. involuntary,
intentional vs. unintentional, approval vs. disapproval of first-order
desires, ordinary vs. extraordinary circumstances, reason-responsive vs. not
reason-responsive. We would not describe a person acting involuntarily,
unintentionally, and with disapproval of their first-order desires as “acting
freely.” On the other hand, a person who is acting intentionally, voluntarily,
and with approval of their first-order desires would rightly be held
accountable in a way the first person would not be held accountable. Why?
Because they were acting according to their own free will!

“But could you have done otherwise?” We should pause and remind ourselves what
is often (or at least sometimes) meant by “free will.” Are there actual
alternative possibilities open to us? Some have argued that we can’t deserve
praise and blame, reward and punishment, or be held morally responsible
without actual alternative possibilities.

Epistemic possibility (or something like it) runs throughout philosophy. This
may cause difficulties for one who arbitrarily decides that epistemic
possibility is insufficient for any meaningful alternate possibilities. The
fine-tuning argument, to give one example, runs on epistemic possibility.
Rejecting it in the realm of human behavior is arbitrary.

I used to think compatibilists were (in a rather annoying way) redefining
terms. In fact, you can probably find older episodes of Counter Apologetics
where I say as much. So I lived a few years as a free will skeptic – as
someone who did not think we possessed freedom of the will in any meaningful
sense. But as the dust settled, and I went on listening to the debate between
compatibilists like Daniel Dennett and his incompatibilist opponents, I found
myself siding with Dennett on nearly every issue of substance. I thought back
to the numerous disagreements I’d had with fellow incompatibilists and free
will skeptics over praise, blame, and moral judgment. I eventually realized
that I was already a compatibilist in all but name.

Whether or not libertarian free will obtains in our world is an interesting
metaphysical question, but I don’t see how it makes _much_ of a practical
difference. Free will skeptics and libertarians seem to me to be entirely
wrong about the dramatic consequences that would follow from not possessing
libertarian freedom. A compatibilist, I think, is someone who doesn’t have a
quarrel with using the term “free will” and who thinks that we don’t need to
run around with our hair on fire if determinism turns out to be true.

A roll of a die could’ve come up 1-6, and this is true (in some sense) even if
dice-rolling determinism is true (which I’ll assume from here on out). Say
that Dan rolled a 6, and consider the following propositions:

Let’s make things even worse. Say that everyone is a product of [blind
luck](https://rintintin.colorado.edu/~vancecd/phil1100/Nagel1.pdf). “Luck
swallows everything,” [as Galen Strawson puts
it](https://www.naturalism.org/philosophy/free-will/luck-swallows-everything).
Everyone is just lucky or unlucky to be who they are, to be in the
circumstances in which they find themselves, to have the desires they have,
the willpower they possess, the values they hold, and so on.

[Compatibilism](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/compatibilism/) is the
thesis that free will is compatible with determinism. In other words, a
compatibilist is someone who doesn’t have a quarrel with using the term “free
will” and who doesn’t think we need to run around with our hair on fire if
determinism turns out to be true. By my lights, free will skeptics and
libertarians seem to be entirely wrong about the dramatic consequences that
would follow from not possessing libertarian freedom.

[Listen to ep. 47 of Walden Pod, Can a determinist believe in free
will?](https://www.patreon.com/waldenpod)

I understand why the notion of libertarian Free Will is logically
incoherent…or at least seems to be. And I was a LFW skeptic for many years
because of this seeming incoherence. But at this point, while I can’t exactly
make sense of the notion of LFW, I nonetheless believe it exists. Granted,
it’s figuratively buried under layers of brain tissue, bodily physical
limitations, and external circumstances beyond one’s control, but I believe
it’s there. And I fully admit that I can’t really back up my intuition with
anh logical or empirical argument. 🤷🏻‍♂️

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F02%2F21%2Fcan-a-determinist-believe-in-free-will%2F&signup_flow=account)

I’ve never been able to get onboard with Free Will compatibilism. Even if our
consciousness does somehow exert downward causation (which it obviously does,
IMHO), all of our “choices” are either completely locked-in at the moment of
the Big Bang (or even “before” that), or effectively locked-in at human scales
with a bit of quantum randomness in the mix, neither of which gives us
anything more than just a *feeling* of having made a free choice.

Furthermore, we don’t know the future. Since we don’t know what outcome will
come to pass, and since our conscious agency plays a role in determining what
will come to pass, it’s unwise to say that epistemic possibility is somehow
inauthentic, or doesn’t amount to “actual” or “genuine” alternate possibility.
No one – not even the libertarian – knows what the future holds. In some
sense, epistemic possibility is all we have.

Even given the full brunt of determinism and luck, a lot we care about remains
stubbornly in place. For instance, there are still virtuous and non-virtuous
people. There’s still a moral law that can be followed or broken. There is
still suffering and flourishing that can be diminished or maximized. There’s
still a social contract that can be honored or broken. There are still moral
standards by which actions and people can be judged, and we can succeed or
fail in living up to those standards. In other words, everything that mattered
before still matters, even if determinism is true and luck swallows
everything. [As J.P. Andrew put it](https://jpandrew.substack.com/p/the-
problem-of-free-will), “It would, to my mind, be a bizarre view of moral facts
indeed that understood them to hold only if free will is possible. Inflicting
suffering for fun is surely wrong regardless of the capacities we humans do,
or do not, possess.”

As you may have gathered, I’ve finally migrated from the free will skeptic
camp over to the compatibilist camp. Years ago, learning about determinism and
moral luck for the first time rocked my world. But as the dust settled, I
wondered if I had been too quick to reject the entire notion of free will. How
much does it matter that we don’t have libertarian free will? How much has
actually changed? Is our ordinary sense of free will really unsalvageable?

As many Christians and atheists have pointed out, appealing to human cognitive
limitations to defeat the evidential argument from evil is inconsistent with
the general project of apologetics. If our cognitive limitations really do
prevent us from assessing whether God has morally sufficient reasons for
allowing evil, then apologists cannot consistently appeal to other popular
arguments for God’s existence. Consistent skeptical theists should also claim
that human cognitive limitations prevent us also from assessing the antecedent
probability of fine-tuning on theism, the probability of our universe
beginning to exist on theism, and even the resurrection. This is one reason
why Richard Swinburne thinks Christians ought not rely on skeptical theism and
instead should actually attempt to provide explanations for why God would
allow the suffering we observe in our world.

To me, this diminishes suffering like we just mentioned. When you actually
look at concrete instances of suffering, the ST response seems almost
perverse. Furthermore, it’s practically a form of radical skepticism. So
they’re appealing to radical skepticism in order to argue that fawns burning
alive in the forest and children starving to death isn’t what it looks like.
And they’re not really even giving a reason why. They’re just saying there
might be a reason why; we can’t know for sure there isn’t one.

Take the example of the daughter undergoing painful but necessary medical
treatment. That’s essentially the situation theists claim that we’re in.
Preventing apparently gratuitous suffering could be as foolish as preventing
your daughter from getting the polio vaccine because it would be painful to
get the vaccine. Of course you’d rather her take the shot to prevent the
possibility of polio in the future, obviously. But if that’s the case with the
evils of our world, you’d be profoundly foolish to try to do anything about
them (or at least many of them).

Let’s take a step back. God has made the natural world coherent to us. The
laws of nature are discoverable and intelligible. He made things this way. So
why has he made the world _morally_ unintelligible? When the ST says, “There
could be unknown morally sufficient reasons,” they’re admitting that the world
seems morally unintelligible, first of all. They wouldn’t have brought up ST
otherwise. But they’re implying, absurdly, that God has decided to make the
world morally unintelligible to us. Why on earth would he intentionally cause
us to hallucinate a problem, especially one that would lead human beings
_away_ from a relationship with him? Doesn’t he want a relationship with us…?
God _chose_ to make the world morally unintelligible to us. He didn’t have to
do this. If the world really is morally intelligible in reality, that means
God is the author of confusion here. Why not make it so we can just _tell_
that it’s morally intelligible? We wouldn’t be having this conversation right
now. Atheists would lose one of their better arguments. Many of us wouldn’t
have lost our faith if the world were morally coherent. So, people are being
sent to hell for an eternity because God decided to create the illusion that
the world was morally incoherent.

So we’ve discussed several reasons to doubt skeptical theism: Draper’s
objection, phenomenal conservatism, that ST is compatible with any possible
set of observations, moral unintelligibility, divine silence during tragedies,
Pandora’s box, and moral paralysis. I also can’t help pointing out that the ST
strategy amounts to saying “God works in mysterious ways.” Well done,
expending so much energy on a philosophy that you could’ve found stitched onto
a pillow at your grandma’s house. I’ve made it no secret that I have contempt
for skeptical theism. How one can look at a starving child and confidently
say, “Hey, there might be a good reason for this,” strikes me as an obtuse
form of radical skepticism. You’re simply failing to appreciate the reality of
the situation, which is that there are tragedies occurring, some of them on
our watch. You’re failing to appreciate the world in which you live. You’d
rather not deal with it, so you pretend it’s otherwise than it is.

If we aren’t in any position to assess whether suffering is actually
gratuitous or not, are we in any position to trust our cognitive faculties as
reliable? After all, God must have had good reasons for implanting this
powerful cognitive bias into our minds. Again, God is the author of this
confusion. He created this powerful cognitive bias. How can we be sure he
hasn’t created our faculties to be inaccurate, deceptive, and misleading in
other ways? The ST already supposes that God has made our cognitive faculties
deceptive and inaccurate in this way. So, we should lose trust in our
cognitive faculties in general, shouldn’t we?

I took this example from real events that occurred somewhat recently, but it
could describe any number of people over the millennia. An earthquake —
natural evil — topples buildings and traps people under the rubble. They don’t
die right away, but of dehydration. So there have been children who died,
alone, trapped under rubble for days before dying of dehydration. If they had
to die, why not die instantly, rather than slowly and agonizingly in isolation
before finally dying? What was the point of that?

For me, it’s absurd on its face to suggest that suffering like this works out
in the end towards some higher purpose. It’s hard enough to explain with adult
humans, but it seems impossible with the suffering of non-moral agents like
young, innocent children as they endure starvation and disease. Here, as in
the case of animals, there is seemingly no soul-making purpose or greater good
that could be achieved. To claim that there is some higher purpose, known only
to God, seems as implausible as it is insulting to those who endure such
pointless suffering.

Skeptical theism is a strategy for responding to the problem of evil. Human
cognitive limitations being what they are, we shouldn’t expect to understand
God’s plan, his actions, or his reasons for allowing suffering. Just as we
expect a small child to be blind to the reasons an adult has for allowing her
to suffer, e.g. in the case of undergoing necessary medical treatment, we
should expect that we will be blind to the reasons God has for allowing
suffering. After all, you’re not a Laplacean Daemon. You don’t have knowledge
of all the events that will ever occur, and how they’re all interconnected.
The world seems morally unintelligible? So what? The ST asks, “How do you know
there isn’t a higher moral purpose to children with cancer? Or the holocaust?
Or to innocents who become terribly maimed in accidents? Or to the millions of
years of animal suffering? Or to children trapped under rubble alone after an
earthquake? How do you know?”

Many words come to mind to describe such a person, but _good_ isn’t one of
them. In any event, a being who harms others or allows them to be harmed _for
no reason_ is not good. If a good God is to allow terrible evil to befall
humans and non-human animals, he _must_ have a reason. To quote Daniel Howard-
Snyder, “on the face of it, the idea that God may well permit gratuitous evil
is absurd. After all, if God can get what He wants without permitting some
particular horror (or anything comparably bad), why on earth would He permit
it?” If God is good, he doesn’t want there to be unnecessary horror. If he’s
all-powerful, he can prevent it from ever occurring.

> (1) If God exists, gratuitous suffering probably wouldn’t exist.
>
> (2) Gratuitous suffering probably exists.
>
> (C) God probably does not exist.

Let’s say you were witness to an attempted sexual assault. You believe you
could prevent the assault, if you wanted to. But, you’re a skeptical theist.
If you had found out about the rape five minutes later, after the fact, then
you would’ve concluded that the event was not an instance of pointless
suffering, but will lead to a greater good, somehow (perhaps “in another
land”). But you’re a witness to it now, and you could prevent it. Everything
you know suggests that you should help, but you just can’t discount the
possibility that the best thing to do would be allow the rape to occur.

[Jeffery Jay Lowder – In Defense of an Evidential Argument from Evil: A Reply
to William Lane Craig
(2016)](https://infidels.org/library/modern/jeff_lowder/pain-and-
pleasure.html) [infidels.org]

> S = some facts about suffering
>
> I = the hypothesis of indifference
>
> T = the hypothesis of theism

Skeptical theism is in conflict with the claim that, on theism, the
probability that we can trust our cognitive faculties is high. The cost of ST
is that theists can no longer confidently make that claim. As is probably
clear by now, ST causes problems that are worse than the one that it aims to
solve. It opens the floodgates for radical skepticism, including moral
skepticism, and thus, moral paralysis.

Paul Draper has argued that while it’s possible that God has unknown reasons
for permitting evil, it’s also possible — and antecedently just as likely —
that God would have unknown reasons for _preventing_ evil. So when a skeptical
theist claims that God has secret morally sufficient reasons for allowing the
brutal rape and murder of a child, or a fawn burning alive in a forest fire,
or starvation due to famine, the problem is that it’s equally likely that God
would have unknown reasons for _preventing_ those evils. To quote Jeff Lowder,
“So the possibilities of unknown reasons for allowing evil and unknown reasons
for preventing evil cancel out. We’re right back where we started, namely,
working with what we do know.”

Everyone agrees that there seems to be gratuitous suffering. So until you’ve
offered a defeater for that seeming, then we’re rationally justified in
affirming that the world is how it seems in this regard. And since the
existence of gratuitous suffering is far more likely on naturalism than on
theism, the fact that we observe gratuitous suffering is strong evidence
against theism.

Here’s one more example before we move on. In 1993, the photographer Kevin
Carter took a famous photograph of a starving child during a famine with a
vulture eagerly waiting behind him.

Many theists give the same analogy I just gave to defend ST. We’re all like
the child undergoing medical treatment. We’re experiencing pain, but it’s for
a good reason that we can’t appreciate at the moment. Our loving father,
however, does understand the reason. I’m embracing their analogy. What a good
father does in that situation, if he can’t make his child understand, is be a
comforting presence in the midst of that suffering. However, many who are
enduring tragedy do not feel God’s comforting presence. On naturalism, this is
not surprising. On theism, it’s quite surprising.

Since God is good, he wouldn’t allow terrible things to occur for no reason.
That’s what gratuitous suffering is: suffering that God would have no morally
sufficient reason to permit or to create. **According to William Rowe, an
instance of suffering is gratuitous if an omnipotent, omniscient being could
have prevented it without losing some greater good or permitting some evil
equally bad or worse.** In other words, it’s gratuitous if the suffering was
pointless. But everyone can think of plenty of examples of pointless suffering
— suffering which led to no greater good. We’ll go into a few specific cases
later, but for now let’s just use William Rowe’s standard example of a fawn in
a forest fire. “Suppose in some distant forest lightning strikes a dead tree,
resulting in a forest fire. In the fire, the fawn is trapped, horribly burned,
and lies in terrible agony for several days before death relieves its
suffering.” It seems quite evident that “no greater good … would have been
lost had the fawn’s suffering been prevented.” So here we’ve got a non-moral
agent, a fawn, being horribly burned by a forest fire started by lightning —
natural evil — and suffering for days, alone, before finally dying. That
suffering did not lead to a greater good.

Sometimes you’ll hear believers say something to the effect of, “We are to God
as an ant is to a human. We can’t possibly understand his reasons!” Well,
whose fault is that? God chose to make us this way. Furthermore, that we can’t
understand why bad things happen to good people, why the wicked prosper, and
why so much suffering on earth seems to be without a purpose _itself_ causes
even more suffering. Again, God is the author of this confusion. We might
interrogate the point further since so many have lost their faith, and
consequently, are now burning in hell. Manufacturing a problem where there
isn’t one is baffling enough; but in this context, where the stakes are so
high, it’s worse than confusing. It’s monstrous.

Imagine if I stood by watching an elderly couple being mugged. The mugger has
their money, but he’s beating them, and they’re totally defenseless. For the
sake of the example, let’s say that I judged myself able to prevent the
mugging, if I wanted to. It would be really easy for me, for whatever reason.
But I continue to watch this helpless old couple receive a ruthless beating
until they’re unconscious. The police arrive and ask why I didn’t try to stop
the mugging.

So we had to take that little detour because some Christians, bizarrely, argue
that being good is perfectly compatible with causing or allowing suffering to
befall conscious creatures for literally no reason. Even though _we_ would
never do that, and we’re supposed to be little worms and sinners, God can do
that and still be considered maximally good. (Not to sound too much like a
cold-blooded utilitarian: technically, harming others or permitting them to be
harmed _for fun_ is more defensible than harming others or permitting them to
be harmed _for no reason_.)

> “The theistic responses to [the] argument [from evil] of which I am aware
> seem unpersuasive, and I find it hard to understand how belief in an all-
> good and all-powerful deity can survive in the face of it. Even if a theist
> supposes that the problem has a solution that we humans are unable to grasp,
> that would mean that God, who created us with the capacity to discover the
> laws of nature and to find the world scientifically intelligible, has made
> us incapable of finding the world morally intelligible. These are powerful
> reasons for doubt, and they have certainly destroyed the faith of some
> believers.”
>
> _Thomas Nagel_

We shouldn’t lose sight of the fact that the world is not morally intelligible
to us because of God’s choice to make it that way. So we’re imagining a
problem that doesn’t exist, and many have lost their faith as a result; which,
according to many Christians, gets you sent to hell for an eternity.

Here’s another angle on this point. In his debate with William Lane Craig,
Draper said, “While there might be reasons we can’t understand why it’s a good
thing to allow this to happen, there might also be reasons we can’t understand
why it’s a bad thing to let it happen.” So while there may be greater goods of
which we are ignorant, this point cuts both ways. It’s antecedently equally
likely that more evil results from these tragedies than we know about. Maybe
there are greater goods of which we are ignorant, but it’s _equally plausible_
that there are greater evils of which we are ignorant. They’re equally strong
points. So the appeal to unknown greater goods doesn’t allow the theist to
escape any more than an appeal to unknown greater evils helps my argument. If
you can appeal to unknown greater goods, why can’t I appeal to unknown greater
evils? Again, these cancel out and leave us right where we began: trying to
make sense of the evidence we actually have.

On the other hand, if they say, “I think this suffering would be terrible and
unnecessary, so I’m going to prevent it,” then they’re tipping their hand.
They, along with me, believe that the world is basically as it seems. There
_is_ gratuitous evil in the world. It’s not all necessary pain, like receiving
a vaccine against polio. And that’s why we should do something about it, if we
can.

Tagged [argument from
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-from-evil/), [aron
lucas](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aron-lucas/), [cognitive
bias](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/cognitive-bias/), [evidential
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evidential-argument/),
[gratuitous evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/gratuitous-
evil/), [gratuitous
suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/gratuitous-suffering/),
[moral paralysis](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-
paralysis/), [paul draper](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/paul-
draper/), [phenomenal
conservatism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/phenomenal-
conservatism/), [problem of
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/problem-of-evil/), [ryan
stringer](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ryan-stringer/),
[skeptical theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptical-
theism/), [skeptical
theist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptical-theist/), [thomas
nagel](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/thomas-nagel/)

Here’s my 6,000 word diatribe against one of the most cursed ideas in
contemporary philosophy of religion, skeptical theism. We discuss several
reasons to doubt skeptical theism, including Paul Draper’s objection,
phenomenal conservatism, divine silence during tragedies, Pandora’s box, and
moral paralysis.

Actually, a Christian could reject ST on these grounds. God _wouldn’t_ create
our faculties to be deceptive. But ST is predicated on the idea that God has
created our minds with a massive cognitive bias, and one that is far more
bewildering and dangerous than ordinary cognitive biases at that. If the
theist supposes that God would provide us with reliable moral faculties, they
can reject ST.

Pointless suffering is a problem for theism because if God is good, he
wouldn’t allow terrible evil to occur unless he had a reason. For the sake of
argument, I’ll grant you that God might allow suffering to exist in order to
fulfill some greater purpose. But a good being wouldn’t want there to be
avoidable, pointless, or unnecessary suffering with respect to the fulfillment
of his purposes; and an all-powerful being would be able to prevent such
suffering. A being who allows suffering or causes suffering that serves no
purpose and which occurs for literally no reason is not a good being.

> “I beseech you, my brothers, remain faithful to the earth, and do not
> believe those who speak to you of otherworldly hopes! Poison-mixers are
> they, whether they know it or not. Despisers of life are they, decaying and
> poisoned themselves, of whom the earth is weary: so let them go.”
>
> _Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra_

> “To borrow an illustration from a developing field of science, Chaos Theory,
> scientists have discovered that certain macroscopic systems, for example,
> weather systems or insect populations, are extraordinarily sensitive to the
> tiniest perturbations. A butterfly fluttering on a branch in West Africa may
> set in motion forces which would eventually issue in a hurricane over the
> Atlantic Ocean. Yet it is impossible in principle for anyone observing that
> butterfly palpitating on a branch to predict such an outcome. The brutal
> murder of an innocent man or a child’s dying of leukemia could produce a
> sort of ripple effect through history such that God’s morally sufficient
> reason for permitting it might not emerge until centuries later and perhaps
> in another land. When you think of God’s providence over the whole of
> history, I think you can see how hopeless it is for limited observers to
> speculate on the probability that God could have a morally sufficient reason
> for permitting a certain evil. We’re just not in a good position to assess
> such probabilities.”
>
> _William Lane Craig_

Keep in mind, we’re not just talking about the suffering of adult humans.
We’re talking about the gratuitous suffering of moral agents and of non-moral
agents as well, where there seems to be very little chance of growth and
greater goods. A moral agent is a person who has the ability to discern right
from wrong, to act according to moral considerations, and to be held
accountable for their actions. When a lion kills, we don’t say it’s guilty of
murder. So young children and non-human animals are non-moral agents, since
they can’t engage in moral reasoning. Their gratuitous suffering is especially
hard to explain. It’s one thing for an adult human to suffer. It’s quite
another for a non-moral agent to suffer, which again, seems harder to explain
due to the diminished probability of soul-building.

So honestly, in my opinion, Draper’s point is enough to put ST to bed. But as
you may have gathered, we have not exhausted the reasons ST annoys me. For
one, STs basically appeal to radical skepticism and dust off their hands as if
they’ve done something. One of my issues with ST is that it’s compatible with
any _possible_ set of observations. It’s basically a form of radical
skepticism, like the idea that you’re a brain in a vat or in the matrix. Of
course, I think it’s true that there’s often a distinction between appearance
and reality. But this is not a blank check to believe anything you please. If
some suffering in our world appears gratuitous, it’s safe to say it is
gratuitous in reality until shown otherwise.

One objection to ST is what’s called the Pandora’s Box objection. Once you’ve
endorsed radical skepticism as a response to the argument from evil, it’s hard
to keep that skepticism from influencing other things that you’d rather it not
influence.

> “According to [the skeptical theist’s] response, we can all agree that there
> appears to be gratuitous evil in the world, but we cannot infer its reality
> from its appearance. Such an inference assumes that if there are morally
> sufficient reasons for God to permit or create the world’s apparently
> gratuitous evil, then we probably will discern them. But this discernibility
> assumption is questionable in virtue of our epistemic limitations. Because
> of these limitations, we might be currently or permanently unable to discern
> the morally sufficient reasons that God could have for permitting or
> creating the world’s apparently gratuitous evil. … our epistemic limitations
> make the possibility of there being mysterious morally sufficient reasons
> for God to permit or create the world’s apparently gratuitous evil…”
>
> _Ryan Stringer_

Let’s say you had a daughter who needed to go to the doctor to undergo some
medical treatment. This treatment wasn’t going to be pleasant, but there’s a
good reason for it. This is essentially what many theists believe about
apparent tragedies. There is some greater moral purpose, some justifying
reason why God is allowing it to happen. We may not know what it is, but rest
assured, there’s a reason. But a good father would be there for his daughter
in the medical scenario. He would try to explain that there is a purpose, he
would make her understand if he could. Regardless, he would try to be a
comforting presence. However, many victims of tragedies don’t feel God’s
comforting presence. Some do, some don’t. This fact is much more likely on
naturalism than theism.

These arguments allow for the possibility of suffering in our world. Here,
we’re not trying to defend the idea that if God exists, suffering wouldn’t
exist. We’re saying that if God exists, _pointless_ suffering wouldn’t exist.
Evil that has no justifying reason; evil for evil’s sake. _That_ shouldn’t
exist if a good God exists.

> (1) Pr(S/I) = quite high
>
> (2) Pr(S/T) = quite low
>
> (3) Therefore, Pr(S/I) > Pr(S/T)
>
> (4) Therefore, S is evidence is that favors indifference over theism

One reason ST is not just incorrect, but dangerous, is that it excuses the
tragedies of our world and diminishes the suffering that’s right in front of
our eyes. If you’re convinced the world is the way that it is for a reason, I
can’t see why you’d change it. In reality, some of the gratuitous suffering is
within our control to alleviate. The world doesn’t have to be quite as awful
as it is, and it’s in our power to improve it somewhat. But if it’s not
_really_ gratuitous suffering, why try to prevent it? Why ease pain if it’s
guaranteed to be aimed at a higher purpose? Suffering, if it occurs, is
guaranteed to have a purpose. There is no such thing as pointless suffering,
remember? It’s an illusion. Why try to make the world better if you’re already
confident that there is literally no gratuitous suffering in the world? ST
engenders a sense of complacency. It strips you of the outrage you would’ve
felt at unjust suffering. And of course, STs behave like normal people. Their
ordinary moral intuitions reassert themselves when they’re not trying to
defend ST and excuse why god is behaving in a way indistinguishable from non-
existence. But the belief that everything is fine, that there is no pointless
suffering — i.e., suffering we should prevent — is not a belief I’d like to
see spread and take root.

There are genuine tragedies in our world. Gratuitous evils. Times when the
good to come out of a terrible situation is negligible or non-existent. The
existence and abundance of tragedies is far more likely on a hypothesis of
indifference than on theism. On theism, you’d expect some good to overcome the
weight of the tragedy. In other words, there shouldn’t be _genuine_ tragedies.
And for skeptical theists, tragedies are a myth! There are only _apparent_
tragedies, since God either will make it right in the end, or he has a
justifying reason for allowing the seemingly gratuitous evil. For STs, there
is no case of a calamity that was visited upon an innocent…and that’s all.
There must be some kind of higher moral purpose. So if you believe in
tragedies, times when something terrible really wasn’t justified and wasn’t
outweighed by any notable good, then you can’t be a skeptical theist. What’s
more, that’s evidence for naturalism over theism. The probability of the
existence of gratuitous suffering on a hypothesis of indifference is quite
high. But on a hypothesis like theism, it’s quite low.

> “[Carter] headed out into the open bush. There he heard whimpering and came
> across an emaciated toddler who had collapsed on the way to a feeding
> center. As he took the child’s picture, a plump vulture landed nearby. …
> Carter scared the creature away and watched as the child continued toward
> the center. He then lit a cigarette, talked to God and wept … In July 1994
> he took his own life, writing, ‘I am haunted by the vivid memories of
> killings & corpses & anger & pain.’”
>
> Time

If suffering seems gratuitous, we’re justified in thinking that it _is_
gratuitous until we’ve been given reason to think otherwise — not just
suggested that there might be reasons to think otherwise. Of course there
might be reasons we could be wrong; that could be said about any hypothesis
that’s ever been offered.

Skeptical theists question the second premise. That’s what they’re skeptical
_of_ : the actual existence of gratuitous suffering. So what do we mean by
gratuitous suffering?

Skeptical theism basically asserts that humans suffer from a massive cognitive
bias: we see gratuitous suffering where there is none. In fact, this alleged
cognitive bias is arguably the most pervasive cognitive bias in the human
catalogue. Sometimes we mistake correlation for causation, sometimes we
experience pareidolia and see faces in random patterns, and we often judge
suffering to be unnecessary. How silly of us!

That first premise, God wouldn’t allow gratuitous suffering, is what’s called
the theological premise. The second premise, that gratuitous suffering exists
(or probably exists), is what’s called the factual or empirical premise.
That’s the one STs want to question. As I’ve explained, I think it’s pretty
clear that a good God wouldn’t allow gratuitous suffering to exist. We can
grant, for the sake of argument, that he’d allow suffering to exist, but there
has to be some reason that justifies its existence if God is good. So denying
the first premise is out, for me. But even if we can conjure up some scheme in
which God allows utterly pointless suffering to occur, I hope we can admit
that this would be surprising. God is supposed to be good, after all; and
causing or allowing gratuitous suffering falls outside our ordinary rubric of
the good. So we could say, modestly: If God exists, gratuitous suffering
probably wouldn’t exist.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F03%2F01%2Fskeptical-theism%2F&signup_flow=account)

So before we move on to my several objections to ST, I want to talk about a
few examples of gratuitous suffering so it doesn’t become too abstract, and we
don’t lose sight of the moral significance of what we’re discussing.

This brings me to another objection to ST. I’m somewhat sympathetic to an idea
called phenomenal conservatism (and as it turns out, so are many theists).
According to Martin Smith, PC is a prominent view in epistemology that says
“if it seems to one that P is true then, in the absence of defeaters, one has
justification for believing that P is true.” The world seems a certain way to
you. Until you’ve been given good reason to think otherwise, you’re justified
in thinking the world is how it seems.

This is one of those rare cases where philosophy of religion meets with
Christianity as it’s actually known out in the wild. Skeptical theists, in
response to the seemingly gratuitous evil we witness in our world, point out
that we are not in the same epistemic position as God. Since we’re not
omniscient, we can’t claim to know all the intricate connections between the
events of our world. Something may _seem_ like a tragedy, but it may have led
to some greater good of which we’re simply unaware.

> “If we are so ignorant of good and evil that we are in no position to assess
> whether an instance of suffering is pointless, then much of our ordinary
> moral reasoning goes out the window … Ordinarily, if we saw something
> terrible about to happen, such as an infant crawling into traffic, we would
> immediately come to the child’s rescue. This is because we implicitly make
> the judgment that the child’s death would be, on the whole, a bad outcome.
> However, skeptical theism tells us that we are in no position to make such a
> judgment. Thus, if we endorse [ST], we should always be in doubt about
> whether we have an obligation to prevent seemingly bad outcomes.”
>
> _Aron Lucas_

That’s how ST works as a response to an argument from evil: we can all agree
that there appears to be gratuitous evil in the world, but just because it
appears that way doesn’t mean that’s how it is in reality. How do you know
this apparently tragic event _didn’t_ happen for a reason? That there _isn’t_
a higher moral purpose to the terrible suffering we witness?

The fact that there’s a jarring photograph helps make the pain concrete, but
it should be noted that there are millions, if not billions of similar cases
that we’ve never heard of that have occurred throughout evolutionary history.

It just takes one example to show that there is suffering without a reason.  
Job 2 v3 (NIV): Then the Lord said to Satan, “Have you considered my servant
Job? There is no one on earth like him; he is blameless and upright, a man who
fears God and shuns evil. And he still maintains his integrity, though you
incited me against him to ruin him **without any reason**.”

Skeptical theists, on the other hand, question the second premise, the
factual/empirical premise, which states that gratuitous suffering exists.
That’s what they’re skeptical of: the existence of gratuitous suffering, or at
least our ability to know gratuitous suffering when we see it. One could deny
both premises, but you only need to deny the factual premise to be a skeptical
theist. I mean, if you thought God is perfectly fine with gratuitous
suffering, then you’d just argue that, wouldn’t you? The only reason to invoke
ST is to cast doubt on the idea that there is such a thing as gratuitous
suffering. If you thought gratuitous suffering wasn’t a problem for theism,
you’d be better off trying to establish that and attack the theological
premise, rather than going down the ST rabbit hole.

Here are the two conflicting thoughts for you, as a skeptical theist: “I ought
to prevent this rape because I judge that that’s how goodness is best served,”
and “I cannot judge how goodness is best served.” If you give up your ability
to judge whether certain events are cases of pointless suffering or not, then
how can you make moral judgements, and therefore take moral actions? There’s
an intimate connection between moral judgement and moral action. If you give
up your powers of assessing whether suffering is unnecessary, then how can you
act? Can we trust our moral judgements about gratuitous suffering or not? The
ST tries to have it both ways.

> “[An explorer] saw an immense field entirely covered with skeletons, and
> took it to be a battlefield. However they were nothing but skeletons of
> large turtles, five feet long, three feet broad, and of equal height. These
> turtles come this way from the sea, in order to lay their eggs, and are then
> seized by wild dogs (canis rutilans); with their united strength, these dogs
> lay them on their backs, tear open their lower armour, the small scales of
> the belly, and devour them alive. But then a tiger often pounces on the
> dogs. Now all this misery is repeated thousands and thousands of times, year
> in, year out. For this then, are these turtles born. For what offence must
> they suffer this agony? What is the point of the whole scene of horror?”
>
> _Arthur Schopenhauer_

> “Taken to its logical conclusion, skeptical theism prevents us from saying
> that God wouldn’t have good reasons for allowing our cognitive faculties to
> be wildly inaccurate and deceptive. For all we know, God has very good
> reasons for instilling us with false memories, or making us brains in vats.
> Skeptical theism thereby gives us reasons to be skeptical of…memory,
> perception, a priori reasoning, etc.”
>
> _Aron Lucas_

You’re probably already familiar with skeptical theism, even if you don’t know
it by that name. “God works in mysterious ways.” “We are to God as an ant is
to a human. What hope do we have of understanding why he does what he does,
allows what he allows?” “Everything happens for a reason.” “God is God, and I
am not.”

> (1) If God exists, gratuitous suffering wouldn’t exist.
>
> (2) Gratuitous suffering exists.
>
> (C) God does not exist.

Some atheists are primarily concerned with helping others. As a result, they
see no point in spending time on things that have no significant influence in
the world. Other atheists are primarily concerned with getting to the truth of
the matter. As a result, they see no point in beating up on creationism,
literalism, inerrantism, and other ideas that to them seem trivially false.
Whether or not God exists does not hang on whether inerrantism is true! It
doesn’t depend on whether this or that harmful form of fundamentalism makes
any sense. You could be _right_ that a particular form of Christianity is
false and harmful. And yet, it’s entirely possible that God exists, and will
someday say “Well done, good and faithful servant” to those who fought the
evil committed in his name.

[Debate Breakdown w/ Ben Burgis: Christopher Hitchens vs. David
Berlinski](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/08/31/debate-breakdown-
w-ben-burgis-christopher-hitchens-vs-david-berlinski/ "This is my appearance
on Ben Burgis’s channel. Ben and I listen to and comment on a debate between
Christopher Hitchens and David Berlinkski over the motion “Atheism poisons
everything.” The video Linktree")

> These sorts of puzzles are entertaining but of no deep import. The most they
> should be able to accomplish is to make the theist refine his definitions
> [of God], which means that they do not get to the heart of the dispute
> between theists and atheists. It is reasonable for the theist to respond to
> these sorts of puzzles by refining definitions so as to eliminate the
> puzzles, because in general, a good definition should (usually) not be
> contradictory. Thus, if someone succeeds in showing that the traditional
> definition of “God” is contradictory, that just shows that it’s a poor
> definition, and we should replace it with a definition that isn’t
> contradictory.
>
> There are limits to this. If the traditional conception of God is so
> confused that there is nothing anywhere close to it that is logically
> coherent, then we should just declare that there is no God. But if there is
> something in the neighborhood that is coherent, then we should interpret
> “God” as having one of the coherent meanings that is close to what is
> traditionally said about God. That’s because our purpose is to learn, not
> merely to score points against people. The way to learn is to address the
> most interesting defensible views, not to spend our time discussing
> trivially false ideas.

To pursue the question of God’s existence, we must engage with the better
forms of theism, which will probably not have [multi-million dollar theme
parks dedicated to them](https://arkencounter.com/). As Michael Huemer put it,
“Who cares if you can refute the craziest version of a view? … The way to
learn is to address the most interesting defensible views, not to spend our
time discussing trivially false ideas.” Even if those trivially false ideas
are widespread, wield lots of influence in the world, and are positively
dangerous, they’re still trivially false. If your primary goal is to uncover
the nature of reality, it doesn’t make any sense to spend your finite time
attacking less plausible versions of theism, even if they’re more popular and
harmful. The (uncomfortable to some) consequence of this is that you’re bound
to spend time examining views of that world that very few people believe in.
If you’re more activist-oriented, this seems totally absurd. Why would you
waste time talking about something that wields no influence and that people
aren’t affected by? If no one in the pews would accept it, why spend time
thinking about it? On the other hand, if you’re simply pursuing the truth, it
seems wasteful to spend time talking about beliefs that are obviously false –
their popularity and harmfulness is irrelevant.

[57 - Is Utilitarianism the Only Good Ethical Theory? w/ Matthew Adelstein
](https://audioboom.com/posts/8138436 "I'm joined by Matthew Adelstein of
Deliberation Under Ideal Conditions for Utilitarianism 101. We also talk about
a few basic things everyone needs to know to be conversant in moral
philosophy.  YouTube Matthew's Channel  Matthew's Blog \(Bentham's Bulldog\)
Consider supporting the show on Patreon here or Counter Apologetics here
Listen to \[…\]")

When I first started thinking about apologetics way back when, I said that my
main concern was the truth: I just wanted to know whether or not God exists. I
still hold that aim. However, I used to be a lot more of an anti-theist. I
shared Bertrand Russell’s sentiment expressed in _Why I Am Not A Christian_ :
“I am as firmly convinced that religions do harm as I am that they are
untrue.” And today, even though I wouldn’t call myself an anti-theist, I still
believe that there are obviously harmful forms of religion, including quite
popular forms of fundamentalism. But combating harmful and widespread forms of
fundamentalism is not all that related to the first goal of figuring out
whether theism is true. They’re two distinct projects: Figuring out the way
the world is and trying to make the world a better place.

A topic like this often leads to the value of philosophy, since – surprise,
surprise – virtually all of these overconfident morons hate philosophy. But
the highest-level discussion of theism vs. atheism is mostly going to take
place in philosophy. The reason for this is that thinking hard about the
question, analyzing every relevant concept and assumption with a microscopic
attention to detail is basically a description of analytic philosophy. So if
you think concepts are best left unclear, and assumptions best left unstated
and unexamined, then you should look somewhere other than analytic philosophy
to explore the question.

> Contrary to conventional wisdom, Christianity has never really taken deep
> root in America or had any success in forming American consciousness; in its
> place, we have invented a kind of Orphic mystery religion of personal
> liberation, fecundated and sustained by a cult of Mammon.
>
> _[Three Cheers for Socialism
> (2020)](https://www.commonwealmagazine.org/three-cheers-socialism)_

[CA108 Psychophysical Harmony, Physicalism, & God w/ Brian
Cutter](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/11/30/ca108-psychophysical-
harmony-physicalism-god-w-brian-cutter/ "Dr. Brian Cutter joins me to discuss
his paper, ‘Psychophysical Harmony: A New Argument for Theism‘, coauthored
with Dr. Dustin Crummett. After talking about epiphenomenalism and why William
James’ argument against it works against all views in philosophy of mind
\(with the lone exception of Type-A materialism\), we explain why
psychophysical harmony seems so \[…\]")

Freeing others from the illegitimate spiritual and moral and intellectual
constraints placed on them by religion is a commendable way to spend one’s
time. (There are religious people who do that as well – I’ve met many of them
in philosophy of religion.) I also think it matters whether or not God exists,
so that’s an interesting way to spend one’s time as well. Yet, those who are
focused on the truth of the matter are often perceived as elitist by the
activist crowd, and the activists are often perceived as idiots by the
philosopher crowd.

[61 - The Vagueness Argument Against Physicalism
](https://audioboom.com/posts/8216604 "When did consciousness first evolve? If
physicalism is true, we’d expect it to have evolved gradually, just as other
complex biological phenomena evolved gradually. But the transition from
feeling nothing to feeling something couldn’t have been gradual. No matter how
minimal a conscious experience is, if it’s “like something” to exist –
anything at all – it’ \[…\]")

To recap, I made the controversial claim that there is a distinction between
the best and worst forms of theism, that we only have a finite amount of time
on the earth, and that most people seem to err on the side of using that time
to address the worst rather than the best. Personally, I don’t care what kind
of trade-off you make in your personal or public life, so long as you don’t
pretend that you’ve debunked theism merely by addressing a few harmful forms
that you have the most personal experience with.

The main issue with the activists is that they seem to think they’re the best
at both projects, despite never engaging with the strongest versions of
theism. Unfortunately, some are incapable of admitting that there is any
gradient of quality in the first place. I’m sure some of them are reading and
thinking, “There are no plausible versions of theism! They’re all equally
implausible!” This is why you’re perceived as idiots. If you can’t detect any
difference between _I Don’t Have Enough Faith to Be an Atheist_ by Frank Turek
and _The Existence of God_ by Richard Swinburne, that’s a you-problem. But
let’s be honest, you haven’t read the latter – or if you did, you didn’t have
the tools to understand it. That’s why you think there’s no gradient, and that
all forms of theism – everything from Lee Strobel’s theism to David Bentley
Hart’s theism – are equally implausible.

[CA109 Meager Moral Fruits w/ Real
Atheology](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/12/28/ca109-meager-
moral-fruits-w-real-atheology/ "Ben Watkins of Real Atheology joins me to
discuss the meager moral fruits argument, a few objections to the argument,
and why we’re interested in it in the first place. Subscribe to Real Atheology
on YouTube and on iTunes  Follow us on Twitter @waldenpod @RealAtheology
@SpeedWatkins  Subscribe on YouTube Listen to our sister show, Walden …
Continue reading C \[…\]")

If you’re more activist-oriented, then you’re probably concerned with fighting
religious abuses, maintaining the separation of church and state, protecting
education from the influence of religious fundamentalists, and liberating
people from the illegitimate constraints placed on them by religious
authorities and tradition. If it isn’t obvious, I gladly join hands with these
people. But if you’re _primarily_ concerned with these goals, there may be
trade-offs with regard to another goal: Uncovering the truth about theism.

Unlike many activists, I think there’s no reason to disparage the activist
project _or_ the philosophical project. The best exemplars of both are
admirable. And as stated earlier, the trade-offs don’t need to be serious.
Maybe you were freed from the constraints of fundamentalism by others, so you
spend a lot of your time trying to do the same for others. That doesn’t mean
you can’t also spend time actually trying to figure out whether God exists.
However, assuming you want to do whatever you’re doing well, these projects
will occupy a lot of time, which is why the trade-offs exist to begin with.
It’s not that these projects are _incompatible_ ; they’re just distinct from
one another and we only have a finite amount of time in this life. You get to
decide what that time will be occupied by. What kind of balance will you
strike? How much of your time will be occupied by the worst forms of theism,
and how much by the best?

****You are commenting using your Facebook account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'facebook' \);) / Change
)

There were quite a few subjects raised that are worth addressing further. I
could have made an episode like this one aimed instead at theists who have
mostly concerned themselves with attacking the most popular forms of atheism
rather than the best forms of atheism. It’s not as if the overconfident
theists in the apologetics space have engaged with Paul Draper, Graham Oppy,
J.L. Schellenberg, or J.H. Sobel. Most of the loudmouths online haven’t done
their due diligence, regardless of whether they’re theists or atheists.

[CA106 One Hell of a Problem – w/ Real Atheology & Counter
Apologist](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/10/07/ca106-one-hell-of-
a-problem-w-real-atheology-counter-apologist-2/ "I’m joined by Counter
Apologist and Ryan from Real Atheology to discuss eternal conscious torment.
First, we take a closer look at the views of William Lane Craig, who famously
denies the possibility of an actual infinite in the context of the kalam, yet
seems to argue that the guilt of those who reject God … Continue reading CA106
One Hell of a Problem – w/ \[…\]")

this strikes me as nothing more than the courtiers claim that there is at all
a “best form” aka “sophisticated theology”. All claims for the existences of
gods fail since they have no evidence for their claims at all.

****You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'wordpress' \);) /
Change )

Why can’t we just agree that we’re doing different things? When two people
have different goals, it won’t make sense to act in the same way. It’s not as
if the activist crowd is unconcerned with the truth – the activists are
generally more concerned with attacking the truth _of influential beliefs_
that make the world worse. (This is entirely sensible.) Philosophers are
generally more concerned with addressing the best versions of each side, since
that’s the best way of figuring out whether we should be theists, atheists, or
agnostics. (This is entirely sensible.) Again, my main issue with the activist
crowd is that they seem to think they’re the best at both, despite never
engaging with the strongest versions of the view they reject.

****You are commenting using your Twitter account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'twitter' \);) / Change
)

[Metaethics & Moral Realism w/ Michael
Huemer](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/09/26/metaethics-moral-
realism-w-michael-huemer/ "Dr. Michael Huemer joins me to discuss moral
realism vs. antirealism, ethical intuitionism, phenomenal conservatism, moral
disagreement, and much else in moral philosophy. \(This aired originally on
YouTube and Walden Pod.\) Ethical Intuitionism Knowledge, Reality, and Value:
A Mostly Common Sense Guide to Philosophy William Lane Craig vs. Erik
Wielenberg Link \[…\]")

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F01%2F25%2Faddressing-popular-forms-of-theism-vs-the-best-forms%2F&signup_flow=account)

Huemer, after discussing paradoxes of omnipotence in his book, [_Knowledge,
Reality, and Value_](https://www.amazon.com/Knowledge-Reality-Value-Mostly-
Philosophy/dp/B091F5QTDS), shared a few thoughts that I think have wider
relevance to the discussion of theism vs. atheism:

[CA107 The Participation Theodicy — w/ John
Buck](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/11/17/ca107-the-
participation-theodicy-w-john-buck/ "The participation theodicy holds,
reasonably enough, that it would be good to create an ideal world. Since it
would be good for God to do so, it would also be good for us to do so \(as
well as any other beings\). The goodness would only be multiplied through our
participation and contribution to the … Continue reading CA107 The
Participation Theodicy — w/ John \[…\]")

A Christian who is actually consistent in this regard, David Bentley Hart, has
written scathingly about both:

“Ken Ham is wrong” is not synonymous with “Christianity is false,” even though
some seem to think it is. “Frank Turek is an overconfident moron” is
undoubtedly true, but that doesn’t mean God doesn’t exist. How is this not
totally obvious?

Host of Walden Pod and Counter Apologetics. [ View all posts by Emerson Green
](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/author/emersongreenblog/)

In the past, I’ve defended new atheism from its critics on the grounds that
new atheism was a socio-political-cultural response to the malignant influence
of certain strains of fundamentalism. It was _not_ an attempt to contribute to
cutting edge analytic philosophy of religion. On the existence of God, they
helped cross off a couple bad answers, if we’re being generous. But I can’t
ignore the fact that many fans of the new atheists wouldn’t like my defense,
since they clearly think the new atheists put the entire issue to bed. Before
I knew anything about the debates that have taken place at the highest level
for centuries, I thought something similar. The forms of theism that the new
atheists reacted to, however, do not represent the best that theism can offer.

[Sentientism Interview (pt. 2) ](https://audioboom.com/posts/8152946 "
linktr.ee/emersongreen  Subscribe on YouTube  Consider supporting the show on
Patreon here or Counter Apologetics here  Listen to our sister show, Counter
Apologetics here  Music by ichika Nito and used with permission.  Full
interview on the Sentientism podcast  Twitter @waldenpod @OnPanpsychism ")

There are three variables that tend to influence the conversation here:
Popularity, plausibility, and harm. If you max out on plausibility, then
popularity has likely taken a big hit, and vice versa. If a belief is
unpopular, implausible, and benign, then your time would be better spent
engaging with something else. But if you alter any of those variables, I think
there’s a decent reason to address it. Still, depending on what you care about
_the most_ , different actions make sense. A balance needs to be struck
between these distinct projects, especially if you intend on doing them well.
Assuming you want to be good at whatever it is you’re doing, both projects are
time-consuming.

[Discussion on
Miracles](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2023/01/09/miracles-panel/
"Friendly debate between three miracle skeptics and a theist.
linktr.ee/emersongreen Subscribe on YouTube Listen to our sister show, Walden
Pod here Music by ichika Nito & Whalers. Used with permission. Follow on
Twitter @waldenpod Consider supporting the show on Patreon here or Walden Pod
here")

[CA105 Responding to Trent Horn’s “5 Atheist Double
Standards”](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/09/07/ca105-responding-
to-trent-horns-5-atheist-double-standards/ "This is my response to Catholic
apologist Trent Horn’s recent video entitled “5 Atheist Double Standards.”
\(The first minute is a cold open. It makes more sense if you’re watching the
video version.\) Watch on YouTube Interview on the Sentientism podcast The
Meager Moral Fruits Argument My devil’s advocate debate Follow me on Twitter
@waldenpod … Continue rea \[…\]")

People in my position are often harsh to the activist-oriented crowd, but
that’s not because I’m against their project. It’s because there’s often false
advertising on their side. Virtually all atheists (this includes atheist
podcasts, blogs, and channels) claim to be able to provide good reasons to
disbelieve (or lack belief) in God or gods. This includes those who don’t
primarily concern themselves with apologetics or philosophy of religion. The
problem is their insistence that they have provided good reasons to reject
theism without ever engaging with the best versions of theism! If you want
your rejection of x to seem warranted, you should engage with the best form of
x, not the worst. It makes no difference to add that it’s a very popular or
very harmful version of x. It doesn’t matter. If you’re extremely confident in
your atheism, and yet you’ve never looked at the strongest forms of theism,
then you’re a dogmatic idiot.

On this podcast and in my life, the balance may tilt a little more towards
pursuing the truth and a lot less towards harm-reduction, since I spend more
time thinking about universalist Christianity and the best arguments for
theism, even though neither of those things wield any influence at all in the
Christian communities in which I was raised. I don’t care, because the
Christian worldview espoused in those communities is obviously false. But to
think that refuting a literalist form of Christianity means Christianity is
false is a mistake. If you spend all your time fighting those forms of
Christianity, you’re not getting any closer to the right answer. You’re just
spending your finite time meditating on one particular bad answer. Which,
depending on how harmful and prevalent it is, might be a good way to spend
your time – provided that you’re willing to make that trade-off.

[59 - Metaethics & Moral Realism w/ Michael
Huemer](https://audioboom.com/posts/8157791 "Dr. Michael Huemer joins me to
discuss moral realism vs. antirealism, ethical intuitionism, phenomenal
conservatism, moral disagreement, and much else in moral philosophy.  Ethical
Intuitionism  Knowledge, Reality, and Value: A Mostly Common Sense Guide to
Philosophy  William Lane Craig vs. Erik Wielenberg  Linktree / The Five
Metaethical Positions /  Noncog \[…\]")

[60 - Why I Support Abolition of the Death
Penalty](https://audioboom.com/posts/8208259 "In many ways, I'm the ideal
audience for apologists of capital punishment. I believe in free will, I think
human beings are responsible for their actions, I’m not opposed to retribution
in all cases, I believe there are virtuous qualities to revenge, and I think
some people deserve to die. However, none of that is enough to justify the
death penalty sys \[…\]")

One little footnote… I think some anti-theists, new atheists – whatever you
want to call them – are sometimes operating under the assumption that the most
widely-subscribed forms of theism are truer to the core ideas of theism or
Christianity than the “watered-down” forms that I’m considering to be more
defensible. I’d very much like to have that argument out in the open, so
please – make that argument explicitly, if that’s what you think. I probably
won’t be entirely unsympathetic to it. After all, we’re talking about
_revealed_ religion. Are we supposed to believe that God revealed it poorly?
If God is concerned with his followers having the right beliefs – say, if
salvation depended on it – it would be really weird if the right beliefs were
held only by a tiny minority of theists. (Nevertheless, I think that theists
who represent the best that the tradition has to offer possess resources for
answering these sorts of problems that fundamentalists lack. As I said, I’d
very much like to have this debate with nonbelievers out in the open rather
than try to guess the specifics of their thinking.)

Theists often bemoan the low quality of contemporary public atheism. In a way,
I agree with them. But they’re not blameless. Contemporary atheism wasn’t
formed in a vacuum: It’s a _response_ to contemporary theism. Most atheists
are former believers who left the faith; what they’re responding to is their
idea of Christianity, which they formed as a part of the Christianity
community. You can criticize the quality of contemporary atheism _and_
contemporary Christianity, but you can’t just criticize atheism without
acknowledging one of the major reasons it is the way it is. There’s no
coherent way to dissociate the shallowness of contemporary atheism from the
shallowness of contemporary theism, specifically Christianity.

The core of chrsitanity is that anyone who disagrees with a god that can’t be
shown to exist will be punished and that this god needed a blood sacrifice by
torture to make itself happy. So your claim ““There are no plausible versions
of theism! They’re all equally implausible!” This is why you’re perceived as
idiots. If you can’t detect any difference between I Don’t Have Enough Faith
to Be an Atheist by Frank Turek and The Existence of God by Richard Swinburne,
that’s a you-problem.” is nonsense. Swinburne is like Tillich, etc, inventing
a god that is so vague it can’t be shown to exist or not.

I hasten to add that there’s nothing wrong with spending time wrestling with
popular-level apologetics – even if your goal is to get to the truth of the
matter – assuming that those apologists represent a worldview that is a live
option for you. If the more popular material is interacting with what _you_
believe (or recently believed), then it makes perfect sense to spend your time
with those videos, podcasts, texts, and so on. For me, it used to be a big
deal that a certain narrow conception of Christianity was false. But since I
wanted to figure out whether or not God exists, I didn’t _stop_ there.
Refuting the version of Christianity that I used to believe is frankly not
that hard. If you want your rejection of Christianity to be rational, you
should engage with the best of what Christians have to offer. Camping out on
the least plausible versions forever doesn’t actually advance your
understanding beyond eliminating a couple bad options. At worst, it’s deeply
dishonest to refute the worst version of an idea, stop there, and act as if
the entire idea has been refuted.

[Sentientism Interview (pt. 1) ](https://audioboom.com/posts/8152944 "
linktr.ee/emersongreen  Subscribe on YouTube  Consider supporting the show on
Patreon here or Counter Apologetics here  Listen to our sister show, Counter
Apologetics here  Music by ichika Nito and used with permission.  Full
interview on the Sentientism podcast  Twitter @waldenpod @OnPanpsychism ")

> The utter inconsequentiality of contemporary atheism is a social and
> spiritual catastrophe. Something splendid and irreplaceable has taken leave
> of our culture—some great moral and intellectual capacity that once inspired
> the more heroic expressions of belief and unbelief alike. Skepticism and
> atheism are, at least in their highest manifestations, noble, precious, and
> even necessary traditions, and even the most fervent of believers should
> acknowledge that both are often inspired by a profound moral alarm at evil
> and suffering, at the corruption of religious institutions, at psychological
> terrorism, at injustices either prompted or abetted by religious doctrines,
> at arid dogmatisms and inane fideisms, and at worldly power wielded in the
> name of otherworldly goods. In the best kinds of unbelief, there is
> something of the moral grandeur of the prophets—a deep and admirable
> abhorrence of those vicious idolatries that enslave minds and justify our
> worst cruelties.
>
> [_Believe It or Not
> (2010)_](https://www.firstthings.com/article/2010/05/believe-it-or-not)

  *     * [ ![](https://emersongreenblog.files.wordpress.com/2017/08/cropped-ca-logo-darker.png?w=50) Emerson Green ](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com)

These are both worthwhile, but there’s a dispute over them between many
atheists. This conflict is something I used to wrestle with internally quite a
bit: Should we address _popular_ versions of theism – beliefs that are
widespread and have the most influence in the world? Or should we address the
_best, most defensible_ versions of theism, which are bound to be less
popular?

The boring but entirely true answer is that it depends on what your goals are.
If you have goal A, then action Y makes sense. If you have goal B, then action
Z makes sense, and doing Y might seem bizarre. If you’re concerned with
activism and improving the world, then you should spend your time differently
than someone who’s concerned purely with figuring out what’s true. Most
atheists care about both, and virtually podcast, blog, and YouTube channel
dips into both subjects. As is so often the case, there are unavoidable trade-
offs in how you spend your finite time. Trying to reduce the harm caused by
religion is a good thing – it’s a public service. But focusing on what’s
widely accepted in the pews is not the same thing as trying to figure out
whether God exists. The most widely adopted version of theism is not _also_
the most plausible version of theism.

There’s just not much overlap between what I’m calling the activist project
and the project of getting closer to the truth about theism. But the trade-
offs needn’t be too serious. Maybe you’re dunking on Turek as one hobby among
others for the common good, while you strive to engage the best of theism in
your downtime. If so, that’s great. Unfortunately, it doesn’t seem like that’s
what many activists are actually doing.

[58 - Defending Libertarian Free Will w/ Necessary Being & John
Buck](https://audioboom.com/posts/8139889 "I'm joined by two proponents of
libertarian free will to discuss determinism, the phenomenology of free
choices, how "ought implies can" could prove we have the ability to do
otherwise, and much else.  linktr.ee/emersongreen YouTube Support the podcast
at patreon.com/waldenpod or /counter Listen to our sister show, Counter
Apologetics here Mus \[…\]")

Due to their differences with other Christians regarding the nature of God,
Latter-day Saints don’t defend the ontological argument. Their rejection of
perfect being theism and their analysis of omnipotence (which effectively
renders Mormon God less powerful than Catholic and Protestant God) opens up
new avenues in responding to arguments from evil that are not available to
other Christians. For me, this is a pretty big deal, since arguments from evil
provide the best reasons for rejecting theism.

> “Mormonism is objectively less credible than Christianity, because Mormons
> are committed to believing nearly all the implausible things that Christians
> believe plus many additional implausible things.”

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F04%2F04%2Fis-mormonism-more-plausible-than-other-forms-of-christianity%2F&signup_flow=account)

Rather than forwarding creation _ex nihilo_ , Mormons – along with many
atheists – believe the universe is eternal. For Latter-day Saints, God is a
part of nature rather than outside it. God organized our universe from pre-
existing material. Consequently, Mormons do not defend the kalam cosmological
argument.

This is not “Christianity plus implausible stuff” – this is Christianity
_minus_ implausible stuff. Unless, that is, you consider eternal conscious
torment, creation _ex nihilo_ , and the baffling notion that our world was
created by a _perfect being_ to be valuable aspects of Christianity that
somehow increase its plausibility.

Strikingly, Mormons reject the notion of eternal conscious torment for non-
Christians. Universalism (or something like it) is the default view in the LDS
Church.

Mormons also believe in evolution, even the evolution (progress) of your
spirit. You can evolve in the next life to become a god.

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[argument from evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-from-
evil/), [atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheism vs mormonism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism-vs-
mormonism/), [atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[atheist vs mormon](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist-vs-
mormon/), [christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christian vs mormon](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian-vs-
mormon/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[christianity vs
mormonism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity-vs-
mormonism/), [counter
apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-apologetics/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/),
[harris](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/harris/),
[implausible](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/implausible/),
[lds](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/lds/), [lds
explained](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/lds-explained/),
[mormon](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mormon/),
[mormonism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mormonism/), [mormonism
explained](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mormonism-explained/),
[naturalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/naturalism/),
[naturalist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/naturalist/), [problem
of evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/problem-of-evil/),
[Religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religion/), [Sam
Harris](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/sam-harris/)

Growing up, I didn’t know much about the LDS Church. I heard it described as a
“cult” during the 2012 presidential election. Even as a good protestant, I
disagreed. After becoming an atheist a few years later, I still viewed
Mormonism as a breakaway sect of Christianity, though I shared the following
sentiment [with Sam Harris](https://www.samharris.org/blog/response-to-
controversy):

_Christianity plus a lot of weird, implausible things._ I think that’s an
accurate summation of how many view Mormonism. But I’ve come to believe that
it’s entirely mistaken.

Of course, Harris is correct in saying that Theory A is objectively more
plausible than Theory B if Theory B is just Theory A + a few additional
implausible claims. He’s wrong, however, in thinking that this maps on to
Christianity and Mormonism in the way he presents it. If anything, he has it
backwards.

Many of the shortcomings of the LDS worldview are shortcoming of all forms of
Christianity. For example, a literalist approach to the holy text will yield
numerous conflicts with history and science. (Many theists seem to think this
is a unique problem for Mormonism.) This is an important point if we’re
playing this game of “Which version of Christianity is the most plausible?” In
nearly every case, Mormonism is either on equal(ish) footing with other forms
of Christianity – and therefore no less plausible – or it has an advantage
over its Christian rivals.

Here’s my [interview with Tarik D. LaCour on
Mormonism](https://youtu.be/M3ShG06vJ2A), how it differs from other forms of
Christianity, and how Tarik’s views on scientism and empiricism factor into
his faith.

Here’s a bonus advantage: The soul-building theodicy [makes for a better fit
within LDS theology](https://youtu.be/nCBD7q5FNe0?t=4184), especially if one
views God as the basis of all value.

Moreover, Latter-day Saints are on at least slightly better footing in making
design arguments, since the designer they posit has a greater basis in
experience relative to the supernatural, non-physical, maximally perfect
designer posited by other Christians.

Though I’ve been arguing that consciousness is sharp, I don’t think there was
any exact moment when this threshold was actually met. I’m not arguing that a
sharp line was crossed at some mysterious point in evolutionary history. Any
candidate would seem arbitrary. The world is a strange place, but presumably
we’d want some kind of reason that the sharp line was drawn _there_ and not
over there (e.g., at nervous systems with n neurons instead of n+1 neurons).
Any explanation of consciousness that terminates in brute arbitrariness is not
going to seem awfully compelling.

What about pain? There are examples of negative states that don’t seem to
qualify as definitely painful. If you put your hand on a warm stove as it
gradually heats up, you’ll eventually start to feel pain, but when exactly? Is
there a precise moment when the stove goes from warm to hot, and when your
experience turns definitely painful? There is no precise threshold, and there
will be borderline cases where your experience doesn’t seem like it’s
definitely pain, but also not definitely _not_ pain. So, a borderline case of
experience? It is a borderline case of pain – a certain _type of_ experience.
But it’s not a borderline case between consciousness and unconsciousness,
which is what the vagueness argument is concerned with. There are many cases
in which it’s indeterminate _what_ a subject is feeling, but not _whether_
they’re feeling.

The motivation for the first premise lies in the vagueness of non-fundamental
physical phenomena, especially in the biological world, which is where
consciousness is typically assumed to have arisen. Complex, non-fundamental
physical states admit of borderline cases. So, if consciousness is just a kind
of physical state, it follows that consciousness should also admit of
borderline cases. Even if we scale down, past the higher-level activity of the
brain, and zoom in to neuronal activity, vagueness is inescapable even at this
more fine-grained level of resolution:

On the other hand, physical states admit borderline cases. If we remove one
atom at a time from a given brain state, it will eventually be vague or
indeterminate whether or not the organism is still in that brain state.
Physical states of a subject’s brain admit of borderline cases. So if
consciousness is just a kind of physical state, then we’d expect consciousness
to follow suit. But since it seems impossible that there could be a borderline
case of consciousness – it’s either like something for a creature or like
nothing at all – then we have reason to think that physicalism is false.

> 1\. If physicalism is true, borderline cases of consciousness are possible.
>
> 2\. Borderline cases of consciousness are not possible.
>
> 3\. Therefore, physicalism is false.

One complication here is memory. I often forget my dreams, and am entirely
unable to recall what I dreamt hours after waking, even though I could
remember for the first few minutes after waking up. Was I conscious the entire
time I was asleep, and just don’t remember it? I was certainly conscious for
some of it, since dream states are experiential states. Yet, I often forget
what I dreamt and _that_ I dreamt in the first place. Why couldn’t it be the
case that a dim glow of consciousness persists as long as I’m alive? Memory is
a fairly high-level feature of animal consciousness, and it’s easy to
conceptually separate experience and memory. It’s possible that there’s no
_experiential_ cutoff, sharp or vague, between sleep and wakefulness. This
would allow us to hold that the boundary between being asleep and being awake
is vague. _Other_ features of our minds come online and go offline, and the
contents of our minds change dramatically, but we can’t rule out the idea that
there’s a light that never goes out completely.

What do I mean by consciousness? Roughly, I’ll be following how Michael Tye
uses the term in his book, _Vagueness and the Evolution of Consciousness_ :
“Consciousness, for present purposes, is experience. Experiences are mental
states such that there is inherently something it is like subjectively to
undergo them. Examples are feeling pain, feeling an itch, visualizing an
elephant, experiencing anger, and feeling fearful.” I’ll be using a few terms
interchangeably – subjective experience, phenomenal consciousness, “what-
it’s-like-ness,” sentience, sensation. For our purposes in this episode, when
I say “consciousness,” I mean the qualitative, phenomenal character of
consciousness: the thing that makes the hard problem hard; the thing without
which it wouldn’t count as a subjective experience at all.

When does the day become the night? Well, there is no _exact_ moment. When
does stubble become a beard? When does someone become famous? There is no fact
of the matter; there is no precise threshold. Take tables and chairs: we could
gradually deform a table until it is vague whether or not the object counts as
a table. So, tables admit borderline cases. At some point in our gradual
deformation, it will be vague or indeterminate or simply a matter of
convention whether _this_ object is still a table.

Let’s take a look at a few of the commonly-proposed examples of borderline
cases of consciousness. (Most of these are discussed in Michael Tye’s book,
_Vagueness and the Evolution of Consciousness_.) Say you’re waking up from a
deep sleep. In that very first moment of wakefulness, you’ll be groggy and
half-conscious. Isn’t this a borderline case of consciousness?

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F12%2F16%2Fthe-vagueness-argument-against-physicalism%2F&signup_flow=account)

I would say the same holds for coming out of general anesthesia, as well as
other supposed borderline states between sleep and wakefulness. Imagine a
patient coming out of a coma. It doesn’t seem unreasonable to think that there
is a definite moment when the lights turn back on, which then broaden in scope
and increase in intensity. If that’s the case, though, consciousness is sharp.

> “Suggestions for the physical grounds of consciousness include global
> workspace activity, neural oscillation frequencies, re-entrant neural loops
> … action-guiding mental representation, and so on. _If any theory along
> these lines is correct, however, there will inevitably be borderline cases
> of consciousness itself. (Emphasis added)_ Global activities and the like
> come in degrees, and so any sharp cut-off point specifying exactly when we
> have enough for consciousness would be arbitrary. The obvious implication is
> that some mental states are indeterminate between being conscious and not.”
>
> David Papineau (2022)

The trouble of figuring out _where_ consciousness exists in nature – whether
or not a given system is conscious – could come down to our limited access to
other minds. Or perhaps the apparent indeterminacy is a reflection of the real
nature of minds – consciousness is actually vague. Either our epistemic
limitations produced by the privacy of consciousness result in indeterminacy,
or (inclusive or) consciousness is actually vague, which means that there is
genuine indeterminacy in addition to our epistemic limitations.

The vagueness argument is concerned with the fact that there’s no wiggle room
between experience and non-experience, between the presence and absence of
feeling. All the putative examples of borderline cases fall short, usually
obviously so. So after all this trying and failing to describe an
indeterminate state between experience and non-experience, are we justified in
taking it to be impossible? To quote Tye, “Conceivability is defeasible
evidence for metaphysical possibility and inconceivability is defeasible
evidence for metaphysical impossibility.” So, we have defeasible support for
the claim that a genuine borderline case of consciousness is metaphysically
impossible. If physicalism is true, borderline cases of consciousness are
possible. Since they appear to be impossible, it follows that physicalism is
false.

Alternatively, maybe sleep is not a state in which one experiences nothing at
all – maybe the backdrop of consciousness is always present. It’s possible
that the boundary between sleep and wakefulness is vague _because_ experience
never disappears entirely. Many of the features of human consciousness go
offline during sleep. So, there could be borderline states between being
asleep and being awake, but it would be a matter of fading certain features of
consciousness, not a total cessation of consciousness itself.

On reflection it seems hard to imagine anything other than a bright borderline
between wholly non-experiential reality and experiential reality. Experiences
are mental states such that there’s something it is like subjectively to
undergo them. It might be indeterminate _what_ you’re feeling, but not
_whether_ you’re feeling. The transition from feeling nothing to feeling
something couldn’t have been gradual: As soon as it’s not nothing, it’s
something. No matter how minimal a conscious experience is, if it’s “like
something” to exist – anything at all – it’s no longer like nothing at all.
There is no space between these two poles for indeterminacy to live. (We’ll
take a closer look at putative cases of borderline consciousness, e.g. states
between sleep and wakefulness, experiences that fall indeterminately between
pain and not-pain, and so on. None of these are genuine borderline cases of
consciousness in the relevant sense, and we’ll unpack them more later on.)
There’s always a fact of the matter about whether it’s like something for a
creature or like nothing at all. In other words, phenomenal consciousness is
sharp.

One reason it’s difficult to conclusively settle the question over where
consciousness exists in nature lies in the fact that phenomenal consciousness
– subjective experience – is publicly unobservable. Physical behavior, on the
other hand, _is_ publicly observable. The physical, material aspect of the
brain and body is accessible through our senses and scientific instruments,
while our inner lives remain elusively private. We can observe avoidance
behavior in worms, electrochemical activity in humans, and (crucially, for
neuroscience) verbal reports like “That hurts!” or “I’m seeing an orange cat
right now.” But your pain experience and orange experience is directly known
by you and you alone. (Earlier, I said _most_ people believe cats and dogs are
conscious. The reason it’s possible for some people to defend the idiotic
Cartesian notion that it’s like nothing to be a cat or dog – that they’re not
experiencing anything – is because experiences are private.) Here, whether or
not the privacy of experience counts against physicalism is not the point. The
public unobservability of consciousness pretty obviously makes it difficult to
determine _where_ consciousness exists in nature, which in turn multiplies the
difficulty of testing theories of consciousness.

> “…is it consciousness itself that is indeterminate, or just our ability to
> decide about it? It isn’t easy to make sense of the idea that consciousness
> itself is vague. Either the light is on, we feel, or it isn’t. The glow of
> consciousness might be dim in some cases, but a dim light is still a
> definite light, not a borderline light-or-non-light. And on reflection it
> seems hard to imagine a genuinely borderline case of consciousness. This
> suggests that any indeterminacy about marginal cases of consciousness must
> lie in our limited epistemic access to the minds at issue, not in those
> minds themselves.”
>
> David Papineau (2022)

This is puzzlingly common. The materialist critics of vagueness arguments tend
to reject the sharpness of phenomenal consciousness, despite the fact that
some of them concede that they cannot describe or imagine a genuine borderline
case of consciousness.

Here’s another way of putting the argument. Physicalists often talk about
“emergence” in a weak sense: Biology emerges from chemistry; chemistry emerges
from physics; and so on. There’s a smooth continuum from fundamental physical
reality to the biological realm. And just as H2O molecules emerge from the
right combination of atoms, so experience emerges from brain activity. The
problem is that the products of weak emergence – complex physical states in
the biological realm – admit borderline cases. States of an organism’s brain
and body are vague. So if experience is just a complex physical state, it
should be similarly vague. But by virtue of being conscious creatures, we can
reflect and see that experience is sharp. What we’d expect to see if
physicalism is true is _not_ a sharp phenomenon emerging at the biological
level. In short, the products of weak emergence in the biological realm admit
of borderline cases. Since experience doesn’t, it’s hard to see how it could
be the product of weak emergence.

Tagged [argument against
physicalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-against-
physicalism/),
[consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness/),
[consciousness
sharp](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness-sharp/),
[consciousness
vague](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness-vague/),
[dualism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/dualism/),
[goff](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/goff/),
[materialism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/materialism/),
[Michael tye](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/michael-tye/), [nino
kadic](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/nino-kadic/),
[panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/panpsychism/),
[Papineau](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/papineau/),
[philosophy](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/philosophy/),
[philosophy of mind](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/philosophy-of-
mind/),
[physicalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/physicalism/),
[sharp](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/sharp/),
[sharpness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/sharpness/),
[vague](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vague/), [vagueness and the
evolution of
consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-and-the-
evolution-of-consciousness/), [vagueness
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument/),
[vagueness argument against
physicalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument-
against-physicalism/), [vagueness argument for
panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument-
for-panpsychism/)

> “We now have an argument for anti-physicalism that is independent of the
> discussion on Nagel, Jackson, and Chalmers, that relies on the very
> intuitive notion that the concept of ‘conscious state’ is sharp, and which
> suggests that one possible upshot is a theory that binds consciousness to
> fundamental physics, such as panpsychism.”
>
> Nino Kadić (2022)

Not all physical things are vague: _Fundamental_ physical things are sharp.
What could it mean for the fundamental __ level of reality to be vague? If
something admits of borderline cases, that only seems to suggest that it’s
non-fundamental – that it’s composed of something _more_ fundamental. The
fundament must be sharp in a way that a higher-level physical phenomenon is
not. Isn’t it interesting that consciousness has this feature that seems to be
shared only by fundamental entities?

> “…if consciousness does not admit of borderline cases, then we will have to
> suppose that some utterly precise micro-level change—down to an exact
> arrangement of particles—marked the first appearance of consciousness (or
> the change from non-conscious to conscious embryo/foetus), and it is going
> to seem arbitrary that it was that utterly precise change that was
> responsible for this significant change in nature.”
>
> Panpsychism, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

> “In seeking physical properties whose concepts are sharp, the obvious place
> to look is fundamental physics.”
>
> Michael Anthony (2006)

There are other examples offered by critics of the argument which also miss
the point, mostly having to do with whether an experience falls into this or
that category, but the intuition of sharpness seems to be fairly common
amongst physicalists and non-physicalists alike. Many of us also have an
apparently conflicting intuition that consciousness comes in degrees, but this
isn’t a threat to the vagueness argument properly understood. Just as I have
no issue describing sleep as “unconsciousness” – since “consciousness” denotes
more than just experience – there’s no problem with claiming that
consciousness comes in degrees. Consciousness _can_ come in degrees in nearly
every sense of how people use the term consciousness, save for one – the one
that tends to interest me. It’s obvious that in some sense, I’m “more
conscious” than my cats. I’m _conscious of_ more things than they are, and
enjoy a richer inner life than they do (e.g., complex language is a feature of
my inner life but not theirs). I’m also conscious to a greater degree after
I’ve had coffee than just after I’ve woken up, even though both states were
like something for me. I think it’s easy to parse out what we’re getting at
when we say things like “He stumbled around the room, half-conscious” or
“Humans are conscious to a higher degree than non-human animals,” and so on.
The widespread intuitions underlying these statements don’t conflict with the
vagueness argument. There’s no issue with “degrees” of consciousness in
practically every sense of the term, even though experience itself is binary.

This does not seem possible for experience, since there is always a fact of
the matter about whether an organism is a conscious being or an insentient
mechanism. Sensation is present in the earthworm or it isn’t, regardless of
what anyone believes about the earthworm, or what we’re able to discover about
it. Besides, what is “borderline case of experience” supposed to mean? A
proto-sensation that _kind of_ feels like something? If it’s “kind of like
something,” then it’s like something. The lights may be dim, but there is a
fact of the matter about whether it’s like _something_ or like _nothing_. Of
course, the contents of consciousness can be vague. We can be unsure of _what_
we’re feeling, or unsure of whether some particular experience falls into one
category or another, but it’s never vague whether experience is present in the
first place. Whether earthworms are conscious is uncertain, but there must be
a fact of the matter about whether it is like _nothing at all_ to be a worm or
_anything other than_ nothing at all.

> “True, there are ‘half-conscious’ experiences, such as the first moments of
> waking. … But, on reflection, even these special experiences seem to qualify
> unequivocally as conscious, in the sense that they are like something,
> rather than nothing”
>
> David Papineau (1993)

At first glance, the border between conscious organisms and non-conscious
organisms seems vague and fuzzy. There’s no obvious way of resolving the
question of which creatures are or are not conscious. Most people agree that
cats and dogs have mental states – they experience things – and so are
conscious. But fewer will agree that it’s like anything to be a fish (even
though they have a nervous system and eyes, and I’m not sure what they’d be
doing with them other than _seeing_ things). Fewer still would entertain the
idea that earthworms have any inner life. But who’s to say it isn’t _like
something_ for the worm who squirms from the wet grass over to the sidewalk?
Maybe they’re driven to behave in this way by negative experiences. After all,
worms possess a (very rudimentary) nervous system and seem to be exhibiting
purposeful behavior.

> “ _What_ I experience is initially indefinite and impoverished. As I become
> fully awake, _what_ I experience gets richer and richer. But this doesn’t
> show that experience or consciousness itself has borderline cases.”
>
> Michael Tye (2021)

If we remove one atom at a time from a given brain state, at some point, it
will be indeterminate whether or not the organism is still in that brain
state. Physical states of an organism’s brain and body admit of borderline
cases. If consciousness is physical, we would expect consciousness to follow
suit.

Describing a genuine borderline case of experience feels a bit like trying to
describe a borderline case of “something-ness.” What is the borderline state
between something and nothing? How could there only _kind of_ be something
without it counting as something (i.e., not nothing)? We can rule out the
possibility of borderline cases of experience on the basis of their
inconceivability.

Vagueness arguments seem more supportive of panpsychism than dualism, since
panpsychism more easily accommodates our intuitions about vagueness. If
experience is sharp, why not just identify like with like?

Surprisingly, Papineau goes on to reject the sharpness of consciousness,
despite admitting that he has trouble even imagining the alternative. He
maintains that the eventual appearance of consciousness must have been vague,
admitting of borderline cases. Given the earlier quotation, in which he seems
to understand why that can’t be so, his rejection sounds more than a little
odd. However, his primary motivation is that accepting non-vagueness would
rule out physicalism. The non-physicalist options present various difficulties
(only a couple of which he briefly raises before deeming them too hard to
solve). Even worse, the non-physicalist options are not physicalism(!), and
physicalism is undoubtedly true. He goes so far as to walk up to the line of
conceding that it’s impossible to conceive of a borderline state of
consciousness, and _yet he still asserts that they exist_. After all, if it
wasn’t so, physicalism would be wrong. Much like the trinity, the
inconceivable vagueness of consciousness is an awesome mystery.

> “…imagine that you are in a hospital bed feeling pain and that you can
> adjust a dial that controls the delivery of morphine to your body. As you do
> so, your pain becomes less intense, gradually transforming itself into a
> feeling of pleasure. In the middle of this process, there may well be
> experiences that are not easy to classify. Again, there is indeterminacy at
> such times as to what you are feeling, but there is no indeterminacy as to
> whether feeling continues to be present.” (2021)

When did consciousness first evolve? Was there a very first creature who broke
the pattern of insentience, feeling sensations and seeing light for the first
time in evolutionary history? Or did our capacity to experience the world
evolve gradually, like everything else? Phenomenal consciousness shouldn’t be
unique. We’d expect it to have evolved gradually, just as brains, eyes, and
cognitive abilities evolved gradually. Everything in biological evolution came
about little by little over time, so it’s unsurprising that the cumulative
products of natural selection admit of borderline cases. Even human beings are
subject to this vagueness: There was no first human, no sharp dividing line in
the continuum between “definitely human” and “definitely not a human.” But how
could this be the case with experiences, feelings, and sensations? I can see
how it’d be the case with particular types of experiences, but how could it be
the case with experience itself?

If a borderline, indeterminate case of consciousness is impossible, our
trouble in determining where consciousness exists in nature – whether or not a
given system is conscious – comes down to our epistemic __ limitations. Our
limited epistemic access to other minds is the cause of any indeterminacy, not
the nature of consciousness itself.

However, as the second premise of the argument claims, this does not seem
possible for consciousness. No matter how minimal a conscious experience is,
it seems impossible to characterize any case in which it is merely “kind of”
like something to be in that state. We cannot describe any borderline case of
consciousness. It may be vague whether something is a particular type of
experience – maybe it’s unclear whether it’s this or that shade of green – but
it is never vague whether something is an experience to begin with. Yes,
aspects of our conscious lives come in degrees – degrees of intensity,
richness, complexity – but the presence of experience itself is another
matter. It’s binary; there’s no conceptual room between “like nothing” and
“like something.” The contents of experience can be vague, fuzzy, and
indeterminate, but there’s a sharp line separating the presence and absence of
experience.

This is why I mentioned coming out of sleep and general anesthesia first. It’s
not unreasonable to think that there is a moment coming out of general
anesthesia that the light turns back on, which then broadens in scope and
increases in its intensity. Those who would appeal to such examples as cases
of borderline consciousness should know that their way of reading that case is
not the only way. (Not to mention, their way has the unique disadvantage of
invoking something that seems impossible to conceive of.) When we cross from
sleep to wakefulness, one might hold that there _is_ an exact moment we wake
up, with the indistinct contents of consciousness gradually becoming less
fuzzy and indeterminate.

> “Neurons are complex physical entities with diverse components. Each neuron
> has a cell body, dendrites, and an axon. Electrical impulses come in along
> the dendrites and go out along the axon. Imagine removing atoms one by one
> from a given neuron. Eventually, as one does so, there will be no neuron
> left. But along the way, there will surely be a range of borderline
> cases—entities that are neither definitely neurons nor definitely not
> neurons. So, the property of being a neuronal oscillation is vague. It
> admits of borderline cases. In general, neurophysiological properties are
> highly complex. The idea that the relevant neural properties for
> consciousness are sharp is extremely implausible.”
>
> Michael Tye (2021)

> “The vagueness argument suggests panpsychism as one of the options that can
> accommodate the strong intuition that consciousness is sharp and determinate
> because it ties consciousness to fundamental physical entities.”
>
> Nino Kadić (2022)

If consciousness is sharp, and fundamental reality can’t be vague, then we
seem to have some support for the notion that we should place consciousness at
fundamental reality, rather than try to defend the unintelligible idea that
consciousness can be vague. Superficially, we have a conflicting intuition
that consciousness comes in degrees, but as discussed earlier, this isn’t a
threat to the vagueness argument properly understood. Further, panpsychism
easily accommodates both intuitions: It allows us to coherently hold that
consciousness is sharp (since it ties consciousness to fundamental physical
entities), _and_ that consciousness comes in degrees (since pre-existing
conscious material changes in complexity and richness as it evolves). The
vagueness argument is primarily an argument against physicalism. It may point
suggestively towards panpsychism, but that’s an added bonus.

I tend to think a more precise definition of consciousness would make the edge
cases easier to identify. Of course, there are many possible definitions. I
think that fact shows where the real vagueness lies, in the concept of
consciousness itself.

The motivation for the first premise lies in the
[vagueness](https://1000wordphilosophy.com/2019/03/11/vagueness/) of physical
phenomena, especially in the biological world, which is where consciousness is
typically assumed to have arisen. If we remove one atom at a time from brain
state B, it will eventually be vague or indeterminate whether the organism is
still in B. Complex, non-fundamental physical states admit of borderline
cases. So, if consciousness is just a kind of complex physical state, we’d
expect consciousness to follow suit. If it seems impossible that there could
be a borderline case of consciousness, then we would have reason to think
physicalism is false.

Describing a genuine borderline case of experience feels a bit like trying to
describe a borderline case of “something-ness.” What is the borderline state
between something and nothing? How could there only _kind of_ be something
without counting it as something (i.e., not nothing)? Whether simple creatures
like earthworms are conscious is uncertain, but there must be a fact of the
matter about whether it is like _nothing at all_ to be a worm or _anything
other than_ nothing at all. We cannot describe any borderline case of
consciousness. Since inconceivability is defeasible evidence for metaphysical
impossibility, we have defeasible support for the claim that a genuine
borderline case of consciousness is metaphysically impossible.

Tagged [consciousness
sharp](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness-sharp/),
[consciousness
vague](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness-vague/),
[evolution of
consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolution-of-
consciousness/), [Michael
tye](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/michael-tye/),
[panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/panpsychism/),
[vagueness and the evolution of
consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-and-the-
evolution-of-consciousness/), [vagueness
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument/),
[vagueness argument against
physicalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument-
against-physicalism/), [vagueness argument for
panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument-
for-panpsychism/)

Here is an abridged version of [my post on the vagueness argument against
physicalism.](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/2022/12/16/the-vagueness-
argument-against-physicalism/)

The products of weak emergence in the biological realm admit of borderline
cases. Since experience doesn’t, it’s hard to see how it could be the product
of weak emergence.

Try to imagine the dawn of consciousness in evolutionary history. The
cumulative products of biological evolution (e.g. eyes and brains) came about
gradually, little by little over time. But it seems that the transition from
feeling nothing to feeling something couldn’t have been similarly gradual: As
soon as it’s not nothing, it’s something. There is no space between these two
poles for indeterminacy to get a foothold. No matter how minimal a conscious
experience is, if it’s “like something” to exist – anything at all – it’s not
like nothing at all.

The problem is that the products of weak emergence – complex physical states
in the biological realm – admit of borderline cases. States of an organism’s
brain and body are vague. So if experience is just a complex physical state,
it should be similarly vague. But by virtue of being conscious creatures, we
can reflect and see that experience is sharp. What we’d expect to see if
physicalism is true is _not_ a sharp phenomenon emerging at the biological
level.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F01%2F01%2Fthe-vagueness-argument%2F&signup_flow=account)

What is meant by “consciousness”? I’ll be following how Michael Tye uses the
term in his book, _Vagueness and the Evolution of Consciousness_ :

> “Conceivability is defeasible evidence for metaphysical possibility and
> inconceivability is defeasible evidence for metaphysical impossibility.”
>
> Michael Tye (2021)

> “Consciousness, for present purposes, is experience. Experiences are mental
> states such that there is inherently something it is like subjectively to
> undergo them. Examples are feeling pain, feeling an itch, visualizing an
> elephant, experiencing anger, and feeling fearful.” (2021)

Of course, it can be indeterminate _what_ a subject is feeling, but not
_whether_ they’re feeling. The existence of experience itself is what’s
relevant to the vagueness argument. There doesn’t appear to be any wiggle room
between the existence and non-existence of experience, between the presence
and absence of feeling. What exactly is “borderline case of consciousness”
supposed to mean? A proto-sensation that _kind of_ feels like something? If
it’s “kind of like something,” then it’s like something.

Here’s another way of putting the argument. Physicalists sometimes talk about
“emergence” in a weak sense: Biology emerges from chemistry; chemistry emerges
from physics; and so on. There’s allegedly a smooth continuum from fundamental
physical reality to the biological realm. And just as H2O molecules emerge
from the right combination of atoms, so experience emerges from brain
activity.

I think where it starts to become problematic for me is the definition of
consciousness, Nagel’s “something it is like”, which itself seems vague. It
doesn’t really provide anything with which we can use to scrutinize the claim
that consciousness is sharp, since it’s not clear what exactly it is that’s
sharp. The examples (pain, itch, anger, fear) don’t seem to help because they
also appear to be examples of things later noted can be indeterminate.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F12%2F24%2Fmeager-moral-fruits%2F&signup_flow=account)

I wanted to say that one hesitation (possibly the only hesitation) I feel in
presenting this argument is that I’m not giving the religious believers in my
life who have been a positive moral witness their due. I sometimes feel a
tinge of guilt when I defend this argument, since I can be misunderstood as
saying that there are no Christians who I respect or look up to as sources of
moral wisdom. That is not at all true. So I have two things to say on this,
one negative and one positive. The negative is that this concern, framed as an
objection to the argument, is not any good. It should be obvious that claims
made about Christianity as a whole don’t reflect on every single individual
Christian, just as claims about the United States don’t reflect on every
individual U.S. citizen. One could say something true about the United States,
yet it would be trivially easy to find ten people who seemed to
straightforwardly disconfirm whatever claim was made. On a strictly
argumentative level, this is totally insignificant. But on an interpersonal
level, it’s highly significant. There are Christians in my life who are wise,
intelligent, moral people. Some have been a positive witness in my life, even
though I don’t agree with them about every minute ethical issue. (Though some
of them I do agree with very often.) In fact, if more Christians were like
them, I would never have offered this argument to begin with. The last thing I
want to do is give the impression that I have anything other than love and
respect for these religious believers in my life, or imply that their
influence hasn’t been positive. I’m overwhelmingly grateful to have them in my
life. I can honestly say that if more Christians were like them, the odds that
I would be a Christian would increase dramatically.

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [draper](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/draper/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/), [inspiring
philosophy](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/inspiring-philosophy/),
[meager moral fruit](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-
fruit/), [meager moral
fruits](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruits/),
[meager moral fruits
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruits-
argument/), [philosophy of
religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/philosophy-of-religion/),
[real atheology](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/real-atheology/),
[Religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religion/),
[theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/theism/), [tippling
philosopher](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/tippling-philosopher/)

Ben Watkins of Real Atheology joined me to discuss the meager moral fruits
argument, a few objections to the argument, and why we’re interested in it in
the first place.

Imagine someone you love on trial for something they did not do. They’re
wrongfully convicted in a slow, clinical legal process; and after a lengthy
time in prison, they’re killed by lethal injection. I can scarcely imagine the
horror of finding oneself in this position of knowing that someone you love
will be taken from you by a mob acting with the pretense of civility and
honor. It is something I wish on no one, and I hope that those responsible for
putting innocent people to death will someday come to their senses and stop
perpetuating this madness.

Opponents of the death penalty disparagingly use the phrase “legalized
revenge,” a concept which does strike me as repellant, but not for the same
reason as most who use the term: For me, it’s the “legalized” part, not the
“revenge” part. Our legal system is intended to be impartial and impersonal.
When offenders commit crimes, the conflict is between the offender and the
state. But revenge is personal by nature. Make no mistake, the death penalty
_is_ about revenge – it’s certainly not about restorative justice or the
prevention of crime. And yet it’s carried out in a bloodless, processual,
legalized manner. Emotionless killing is unsettlingly creepy, and there’s
certainly nothing cathartic or satisfying – let alone virtuous – about this
kind of legalized “revenge” at the hands of a dispassionate third party. It no
longer resembles anything like honorable revenge. So what’s the point?

The abolition of the death penalty, say its apologists, would involve a
genuine moral cost: Those who deserve execution will walk free. But granting
that this is a genuine evasion of justice doesn’t mean it’s the _only_
consideration we need to factor in. So, John Wayne Gacy is killed by lethal
injection instead of dying in prison. Great. But is that worth George Stinney?
The moral side of my case rests on the idea that saving innocent lives is far
more important than ending those of the guilty. Killing those who deserve to
die is just not as important as saving those who do not deserve to die.

> “The brothers’ virtue lies not just in the act of revenge – which is
> gruesome and arguably disproportionate – but also in the anger that causes
> it. By adopting a prudent ‘what’s done is done, and let’s make the best of
> it’ approach, Jacob shows nothing but a concern for his safety and profit.
> The two brothers, by contrast, are too outraged over the treatment of their
> sister to engage in a cost-benefit analysis. Their anger leads to a
> decidedly imprudent act of revenge, and it’s the imprudence that
> demonstrates loyalty to their sister.” (pp.148-149)

Even the defenders of capital punishment could be swayed by altering the ratio
of guilty:innocent executions. They’ll make it known that they’re willing to
have an innocent person killed here and there if it means stacking up a pile
of others who deserve it. Maybe they’re comfortable with one in a thousand, or
one in a hundred, but one in ten? Thirty percent? Forty percent? When does
saving the innocent countervail the punishment of the guilty? What if we had
to kill ninety-nine innocent people in order to kill one person who deserved
it? I think any morally normal person would agree that that would be
unacceptable. So how many innocent people are you, the defender of the death
penalty, comfortable with killing? How much blood on your hands is too much?

Do some people deserve to die? Should there be a death penalty? Contrary to
what some proponents of capital punishment believe, these are not two ways of
asking the same question.

Of course, those who (at least profess to) think there’s nothing good about
revenge won’t be moved by this one way or the other. For those of us who see
something _good_ about revenge – some forms of revenge, that is – you have to
ask yourself if its virtues are present in our death penalty system.

These practical concerns do not cut to the heart of the matter, but it is a
fact that no man-made guilt-determining structure will be without flaws – it
will determine guilt imperfectly. (“Imperfectly” is a hell of a euphemism
here.) So how comfortable are you with having innocent people killed, like
[George Stinney](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Stinney)? Once again, it
is an unavoidable fact that a defense of the death penalty in practice means
defending the murder of innocent people at the hands of the state. The murder
of [14-year-old George Stinney](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-
mix/wp/2014/12/18/the-rush-job-conviction-of-14-year-old-george-stinney-
exonerated-70-years-after-execution/) could have been avoided. Unfortunately,
he will not be the last victim of death penalty apologists.

The other version of this objection is a moral claim about justice: “We’re
doing right by the victims in our execution of the criminal.” And as I’ve been
trying to say, I don’t really dispute this. Some people deserve to die. I do,
however, think that taking an innocent life is a major countervailing
consideration. In fact, it’s often the offense that landed the criminal in
this position to begin with! If we were really horrified by the perversity of
killing an innocent person – extinguishing the life of one who truly does not
deserve it – then shouldn’t we be horrified at the prospect of doing it
ourselves?

> “If a liberal state must abstain from unjust coercion, it must also endeavor
> to alleviate all those illicit burdens it does impose … To fail to try to
> put things aright evinces a callousness to injustice that, if not equivalent
> in countenancing the original wrongful act, stands in close proximity.”
>
> _Benjamin Yost, Against Capital Punishment_

Proponents of capital punishment too often burn their energy zealously
defending claims that I would not dispute. They’ll recount grisly stories,
highlighting some of the darkest chapters of human existence, then throw up
their hands as if it’s just plain obvious that this person deserves to die.
But this is not where the conflict lies.

> “The vast majority of law enforcement professionals surveyed agree that
> capital punishment does not deter violent crime; a survey of police chiefs
> nationwide found they rank the death penalty lowest among ways to reduce
> violent crime. They ranked increasing the number of police officers,
> reducing drug abuse, and creating a better economy with more jobs higher
> than the death penalty as the best ways to reduce violence. The FBI has
> found the states with the death penalty have the highest murder rates.”
>
> _The Case Against the Death Penalty, The American Civil Liberties Union_

> “The death penalty system in the US is applied in an unfair and unjust
> manner against people, largely dependent on how much money they have, the
> skill of their attorneys, race of the victim and where the crime took
> place.”
>
> _The Case Against the Death Penalty, The American Civil Liberties Union_

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F12%2F07%2Fwhy-i-support-abolition-of-the-death-penalty%2F&signup_flow=account)

_“Oh, you say you value innocent life, up there on your high horse, yet you’ve
forgotten about the real victims. It’s not the people sitting on death row.
Many of those people_ are _guilty, and they_ did _commit heinous crimes. What
about their victims? Or are you only concerned with the people on death row?”_

Tagged [abolish the death
penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/abolish-the-death-
penalty/), [aclu](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aclu/), [against
capital punishment](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/against-
capital-punishment/), [against the death
penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/against-the-death-
penalty/), [amnesty
international](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/amnesty-
international/),
[arguments](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments/), [arguments
against capital
punishment](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments-against-
capital-punishment/), [arguments against the death
penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments-against-the-
death-penalty/), [Benjamin
yost](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/benjamin-yost/), [capital
punishment](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/capital-punishment/),
[death penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/death-penalty/),
[debate](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debate/), [George
stinney](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/george-stinney/), [Joshua
marquis](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/joshua-marquis/), [oppose
the death penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/oppose-the-
death-penalty/),
[prageru](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/prageru/), [tamler
sommers](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/tamler-sommers/)

Even granting that one might deserve to die, that doesn’t mean that every way
of going about it is just as good as any other way. Some stories of revenge
killings, fictional and non-fictional, possess virtues such that many (if not
most) people can’t help but feel at least a tinge of admiration. But what’s
honorable about impersonal capital punishment from a third-party who didn’t
know the victims? Death by lethal injection years after the crime at the hands
of a faceless employee is a far cry from the invigorating stories of revenge.
Where’s the bravery? Or courage, or risk-taking, or strength, or loyalty?
_None_ of that is present. The reality of the death penalty isn’t that it’s
excessively cruel, but that it’s a cowardly, sanitized, impersonal,
embarrassing husk of what its proponents undeservedly claim to embody.

> “…honorable avengers demonstrate virtues like bravery, loyalty, and
> integrity. They take risks and accept responsibility for their actions. The
> three Israeli settlers showed none of these characteristics. They were
> cowards, looking for a physically slight victim to make the abduction easier
> and less risky. They had no personal ties to the Israeli victims … The
> killers did not accept responsibility; they tried to burn all evidence of
> their behavior. One of them pleaded insanity at the trial.” (p.146)

> “…opposition to the death penalty wasn’t the real problem with Dukakis’s
> response. Rather, it was the clinical nature of his answer to such a
> personal question. Like Jacob, Dukakis showed no depth of feeling, no anger,
> no fierce loyalty to a close family member. Kitty has been raped and killed,
> and Dukakis is worried about whether the death penalty is a deterrent? This
> is no time for a cost-benefit analysis.” (pp.149-150)

It’s not enough to defend the idea that we have free will, that we’re
responsible for our actions, that some have committed unspeakable acts of
evil, or even that the worst of the worst deserve to die. If you defend the
death penalty, you _must_ defend the death penalty _in practice_ , not just in
theory. People will be killed in practice, not in theory. To defend capital
punishment _is to defend_ the police, the courts, and the state generally in
its ability to determine guilt and carry out punishments. Abstract moral
arguments are insufficient: _You need to defend the state explicitly_ if you
want your case for capital punishment to withstand an iota of scrutiny. Even
if some people deserve to die, it wouldn’t mean a given organization should
have the legitimacy and power to carry out executions.

What people like Marquis don’t seem to realize is that this is _inevitable_.
(If they do understand this, then it follows that they’re consciously
defending a _pro tanto_ morally arbitrary system of ending human lives.) Even
if we eliminate the _current_ sources of arbitrariness in our justice system,
new ones will surely replace them. Any cursory glance at the history of
capital punishment should assure us of this. Whether it’s the laws themselves,
the application and enforcement of the laws, or the determination of guilt,
there will be unjust killings.

> “‘Bernard, as you know, I’ve been against the death penalty all of my life.
> I don’t think it’s the state’s business to end the lives of its citizens, no
> matter how heinous their actions. And I’ll tell you something else: if Kitty
> had been raped and murdered, I wouldn’t want the man executed by lethal
> injection fifteen years later, after dozens of appeals and legal challenges.
> I’d want to track down that son of a bitch before the law could get ahold of
> him and kill him myself with my bare hands. I’d think it was my job to do
> it, not some district attorney or judge or jury of twelve people who didn’t
> even know her. Maybe society can’t allow that to happen, but that’s what I’d
> want to do in that situation.’

The opponents of capital punishment seem to be more clear-eyed about the
imperfect and morally arbitrary nature of the state’s process of determining
guilt.

Even when everything goes as it’s designed – when a person guilty of a heinous
crime is sentenced to death – the virtues of revenge are absent. Advocates of
capital punishment seem to have something quite lofty in their minds, but
their self-image is delusionally inaccurate. The clinical and cowardly way in
which life is being taken is enough to drain any remaining respect I might’ve
had for the death penalty system.

> This response would have allowed Dukakis to retain his opposition to the
> death penalty and turn the tables on those who accused him of being ‘soft on
> crime’. Now it’s the proponents of capital punishment who are clinical,
> cowardly, and ‘by the book’. They’re the ones who want a torturous legal
> bureaucracy to do what a decent husband should want to do himself. By
> tapping into virtuous qualities of revenge, Dukakis could have had the best
> of both worlds.
>
> Critics of the death penalty often refer to it as ‘legalized revenge’, but
> the truth is closer to the opposite. Honor cultures, as we’ve seen, think
> it’s shameful when third parties punish people who have wronged them or
> their families. Revenge is personal. Most arguments against the death
> penalty involve deterrence and racial bias, and thus far arguments haven’t
> resonated with a majority of the US population. Is the death penalty a
> deterrent? Probably not, but proponents can reply that it’s not about
> deterrence; it’s about justice. Is there racial bias in how the death
> penalty is applied? Absolutely. But advocates can reply that we must work to
> eliminate the racial bias, not prohibit the practice. But what if, like my
> hypothetical Dukakis, opponents called the death penalty dishonorable—a sign
> of cowardice and weakness? This challenge might have greater resonance,
> especially for people in the so-called honor states where capital punishment
> is most popular.”
>
> _Why Honor Matters_ (pp.150-151)

[Against Capital Punishment by Benjamin Yost, Reviewed by Jeffrey Howard –
Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews](https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/against-capital-
punishment/)

We can make progress: we no longer kill 13-year-olds for stealing spoons. Yet,
I doubt anyone would defend the idea that we have a perfect justice system, or
that we’ll ever have a perfect justice system. Outside of thought experiment
land, it’ll always be imperfect, even if we stipulate to the people handing
out these irreversible punishments, “Oh, by the way, you have to be certain.”
Once again, how is this requirement of assurance any different from “Beyond a
reasonable doubt,” which is the standard now and was the standard at the time
of every death penalty horror story in recent memory? The evidential standard
for receiving the death penalty was never “Eh, flip a coin” or “Check your
crystal ball.” Every innocent who’s been convicted and put to death died at
the hands of people who thought they couldn’t be wrong.

In his book _[Why Honor Matters](https://www.amazon.com/Why-Honor-Matters-
Tamler-Sommers/dp/0465098878)_ , Tamler Sommers writes that while vengeance is
“hard to contain, hard to get right”, it’s certainly not always immoral.
(Interestingly, the emotions behind the desire for revenge are absent only in
those who we’d likely regard with suspicion and disgust.) In book 34 of
Genesis, a young woman named Dinah is kidnapped by a powerful man and raped.
While her two brothers are grieved and angry, their father, Jacob, seems to be
neither, and is primarily concerned with avoiding violent conflict and how he
might profit from being paid damages by his daughter’s rapist. At great
personal risk, the two brothers disobey their father and kill their sister’s
tormentor. (And a lot of other people. It’s the Old Testament.) As Sommers
explains,

Likewise, it does not follow from “Some people do not deserve to live” that
“The state should end the lives of some of its citizens.” Ask yourself how
much you trust the police, the court system, and the state generally. Are they
the body who should be given this power over life and death? Who should be
permitted to kill us with impunity?

Capital punishment is not reconcilable with the principle of remedy. When
mistakes are inevitably made, the punishment for the wrongly convicted cannot
be brought to an end and they cannot be given damages.

Hey, here’s your chance! Here’s your chance to be the unstoppable badass you
imagine yourself to be! So many advocates of capital punishment are this man,
with a gulf between their self-image and what they actually are. Many of us
know guys like this, with body armor and guns, playing dress-up. For them,
it’s a costume party for adults. Most if not all of these people advocate the
death penalty (because they’re so incredibly badass). No, they’re not soft!
That’s why they support _the death penalty_. That’s why they want…someone else
to do the thing that they don’t have the courage, loyalty, and strength to do
themselves. Some don’t possess these qualities, and seem to think that
advocating capital punishment proves that they don’t lack them. The sickly
reality of the death penalty, however, is far removed from what these people
seem to have in mind. They pretend to have those qualities of courage,
loyalty, and strength, completely unearned, while a faceless employee of the
state carries out sanitized, impersonal “revenge” that’s been stripped of
every virtue.

He begins with an illustration from the 1988 presidential debates, in which
Michael Dukakis, leading the polls at the time, is widely believed to have
fumbled an answer so spectacularly that it cost him the election. Moderator
Bernard Shaw asked, “If [your wife] Kitty Dukakis were raped and murdered,
would you favor an irrevocable death penalty for the killer?”

It’s plausible that human error is the ultimate source of moral arbitrariness
in the death penalty system. But human beings are involved at every single
stage of the process. So, it’s reasonable to conclude that we will never
eliminate moral arbitrariness from the death penalty system.

Sommers, in the light of his more general defense of our moral intuitions
concerning honor and dishonor, offers a novel argument against the death
penalty at the end of the fifth chapter of his book. He doesn’t try to argue
that revenge killing is always impermissible. Quite the contrary – there are
virtuous qualities of revenge.

Since the application of the death penalty will inevitably be morally
arbitrary in some cases – either due to the morally arbitrary nature of the
laws themselves, the enforcement of the law, or the imperfect determination of
guilt – we cannot have the death penalty without murdering innocents. Since
saving innocent life is far more important than ending the lives of the
guilty, this should dissuade us from maintaining a death-penalty system.

If one were to bet on my position on the death penalty based on some of my
other views, they’d probably guess wrong. I believe in free will; I think
human beings are responsible for their actions; and I’m not opposed to
retribution in all cases; I think there are virtuous qualities to revenge; and
I think some people deserve to die. Further, the more common arguments against
the death penalty, to me, have little to no import:

This requirement of certainty – in addition to ignoring the fact that this is
effectively the standard already – does nothing to undermine other ways in
which the accused could be unworthy of capital punishment. We could be certain
that the defendant was guilty of stealing a spoon. Of course, they wouldn’t
deserve to be hanged for this offense, though that’s exactly what happened to
13-year-old Andrew Brenning in 1801. As Joshua Marquis – an advocate of the
death penalty – admits, many of those presently on death row do not deserve
the death penalty. The correct determination of guilt is no guarantee that the
offense will warrant capital punishment. It was the case in 1801, and it’s
still the case today.

Earlier, we talked about why merely justifying the idea that some people
deserve to die is insufficient to justify the death penalty system. Likewise,
defending the permissibility of revenge when terrible wrongs have been
committed is insufficient to justify the death penalty system.

One version of this objection is a moral claim about just deserts. The other
is an empirical claim about the deterrent effects of capital punishment.
First, let’s deal with the easier of the two: the death penalty is not an
effective deterrent. It has no public safety benefit.

It’s not about having the punishment _undone_ , which is impossible. The
wrongfully imprisoned can’t get those years of their life back. The asymmetry
between imprisonment and the death penalty lies in our inability to _bring the
punishment to an end_ and to try to make things right for the wrongfully
convicted. While those who have been imprisoned can be freed and paid damages,
those who have been killed cannot have their punishment brought to an end or
remedied. And though you might think that the _families_ of the wrongfully
killed could receive damages, that’s not equivalent to compensating the one
who was wrongfully convicted. There’s no chance of remedy _for them_ , because
the enthusiasts for the death penalty had them killed.

Sommers believes that we are capable of “reorient[ing] our understanding of
justice to reflect what’s true and good about revenge without incurring its
unacceptable costs”, but that this would likely require a more fundamental
reevaluation of our Enlightenment values and our rejection of honor culture.
Honor can ward off cowardice, shamelessness, and selfishness. Properly
contained, it can engender courage, integrity, self-respect, loyalty,
solidarity, and potentially cure some measure of alienation and atomization.
If you’re at all interested in moral philosophy and moral psychology, I can’t
recommend the book enough (and if that doesn’t convince you, then buy it to
help assuage my guilt over including a gigantic blockquote).

What if we reserved capital punishment for those whose guilt was certain? The
problem with this is that it ignores the _current_ standard, which is already
supposedly high enough to preclude any reasonable doubt. (What do those who
deploy this apologetic think the standard is now? 70% confidence?) Despite
this nominally high bar of “beyond a reasonable doubt,” many innocents have
been wrongfully convicted and put to death. In most (if not all) of those
cases, there _was_ room for reasonable doubt. But this high-minded standard
was imperfectly applied, which is exactly what would happen – has happened –
with any standard of certainty or near-certainty of guilt. Besides, any
specific example of a crime in which we’re certain of the perpetrator’s
culpability is going to be contentious. In the past, many judges, juries,
members of the press and public have felt that the evidence was only possible
to interpret in one way, only to discover that they had been mistaken.

Arguing that some people deserve to die is not sufficient to show that any
particular organization should have the power and legitimacy to carry out
executions.

Why he checked his phone while children were being gunned down, screaming, I
don’t know. But the _Punisher_ wallpaper ensured that this image would be
forever branded on my brain. For those who are unaware, _The Punisher_ is a TV
show about a vigilante:  
  
_“After exacting revenge on the people responsible for the deaths of his wife
and children, Frank Castle uncovers a conspiracy that runs deeper than New
York’s criminal underworld. Now known as the Punisher, he must dig deep into
the conspiracy to discover the truth about injustices that affect more than
just him and his family.”_

Benjamin Yost defends “the principle of remedy” in his treatise against the
death penalty. This is, according to Yost, a fundamental tenet of liberal
political morality. We _know_ the state will make mistakes, and an institution
sensitive to justice must be prepared to remedy its mistakes. Execution,
however, is irreversible. It _can’t_ be remedied, and consequently falls short
of this ideal. There’s a finality to death that renders it disanalogous to
imprisonment. If a prisoner is discovered to be innocent, as thousands have
been in the wake of forensic advancements – not to mention moral progress in
eliminating unjust or nonsensical laws – they can be freed and paid damages.
Those who have been wrongly killed, however, cannot be resurrected.

Dukakis replied, “No, I don’t, Bernard, and I think you know that I’ve opposed
the death penalty during all of my life. I don’t see any evidence that it’s a
deterrent, and I think there are better and more effective ways to deal with
violent crime. We’ve done so in my own state, and it’s one of the reasons why
we have had the biggest drop in crime of any industrial state in America, why
we have the lowest murder rate of any industrial state in America.” After the
election, the conventional wisdom held that any presidential candidate opposed
to the death penalty was unelectable. But, as Sommers argues,

There’s a certain kind of death penalty apologist – not all, just some – who
remind me a lot of a police officer from Uvalde. In May 2022, a mass shooting
occurred at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas. 18-year-old Salvador
Ramos killed nineteen students and two teachers, and wounded seventeen others.
There have been several scandals involving the police department, and we won’t
get into them now, but it seems clear that the police were too afraid to do
much of anything as the children were being massacred. One image from a
security camera made quite an impression on me:

The protection of innocent people is at the center of my anti-death penalty
position. One reason it seems so obvious to me that protecting innocent lives
is _far_ more important than doling out capital punishment is the contrast
between these two moral statements:

[It took 10 minutes to convict 14-year-old George Stinney Jr. It took 70 years
after his execution to exonerate him –
WaPo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2014/12/18/the-rush-
job-conviction-of-14-year-old-george-stinney-exonerated-70-years-after-
execution/)

The application of capital punishment is often morally arbitrary. It’s not as
if the death penalty is exclusively reserved for the worst of the worst. Even
setting aside the innocents who have been on death row, those who are _guilty_
are often undeserving as well! In fact, advocates of capital punishment will
acknowledge that the death penalty system is often applied in a morally
arbitrary manner. Joshua Marquis, for instance, believes that _many_ of those
on death row do not deserve the death penalty. To be clear, he thinks that
these people are guilty – they just don’t deserve to die for what they did.
Even when guilt is determined correctly, that’s no guarantee that the death
penalty will be a proportionate punishment, since capital punishment, in
practice, is applied in a morally arbitrary manner.

Some might worry this proves too much. If we’re so concerned with the
imperfect determination of guilt, and by extension, the administration of
punishment, then shouldn’t we abolish prisons? After all, some innocents are
imprisoned. Some laws are morally arbitrary, and even just laws are
arbitrarily enforced.

While the first statement is at least defensible, the latter is a joke.
There’s an obvious asymmetry here, because saving innocent people is more
important than killing guilty people. The staunchest defender of capital
punishment wouldn’t appeal to a few worthy recipients if they were the
_exception_. Unless the vast majority are guilty, even they would lose their
stomach for supporting the policy in practice. So, we already agree that
preserving innocent life is _far_ more important than justifiably killing the
few who deserve it. Yet, they have a much higher tolerance for killing
innocent people than we do.

> “The standard argument for abolishing the death penalty holds that even when
> moral agents have culpably perpetrated heinous wrongs, executing them is an
> unacceptable attack on their dignity, something that even they do not
> deserve to suffer.”
>
> [_Jeffrey W. Howard, University College
> London_](https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/against-capital-punishment/)

First, in no way does it follow from “Some people deserve the death penalty”
that “ _This_ organization should be permitted to determine guilt and carry
out executions.” There’s a chasm between the judgment that some people
plausibly do not deserve to live and the judgment that a given body should
have the legitimacy to determine guilt and kill people based on its
assessments. Imagine I gave an impassioned defense of the death penalty, and
concluded by saying that the power to perform executions should be in the
hands of the Lincoln Elementary School PTA. The parent-teacher association
from an elementary school in southwest Michigan should be the arbiters of
guilt and death. After all, capital punishment is justified! Necessary, even!

Of course, no one in their right mind would offer unconditional support for
any and all tales of vengeance: “…honorable avengers demonstrate virtues like
bravery, loyalty, and integrity. They take risks and accept responsibility for
their actions.” (p.146)

This particular section will not resonate with everybody. I’m going to assume
that revenge is not immoral across the board, and some on both sides will take
issue with that assumption. But for those who don’t think revenge is always
impermissible or ill-advised, you might be able to appreciate another reason
why the death penalty strikes some of us as so odious.

Most of us are naturally drawn into _some_ stories of revenge, fictional or
not, and repelled by others. What explains this distinction in many cases is
not a blanket condemnation or affirmation of revenge. I think it has more to
do with those conditions Sommers identifies. For example, in the summer of
2014, three Israeli settlers drove through East Jerusalem looking to avenge
the deaths of three other Israelis in the West Bank. The settlers’ were
looking for someone “lightweight,” who could be easily targeted. They came
across a young Palestinian named Mohammad, sixteen years old, and threw him in
their car before speeding off to a more remote area. The three settlers beat
the teenager to death and then set him on fire. Although they attempted to
destroy all the evidence, they were quickly caught and convicted of murder. As
Sommers explains,

Their dignity? If this was the only reason to oppose the death penalty, I
would unequivocally support it. I think some people do not deserve to live –
we would certainly not be doing wrong by a sadistic murderer in killing them.
All this to say that I’m the ideal audience for advocates of the death
penalty! Their typical arguments don’t sway me because _none of that_ is
sufficient to legitimize state-sanctioned capital punishment or overcome the
considerations I’ve raised. Maybe some of those considerations have been
slightly unorthodox, but even some of the more common arguments against
capital punishment can withstand the predictable barrage of death penalty
apologetics:

Each one of these ideas we’ve discussed is more plausible than its denial.
Realism, Phenomenal precision, Nonemergence, Monism, the seeming impossibility
of bridging the objective and subjective, the fact that we don’t have an
intelligible story of emergence (and should have one). And these ideas, taken
together, arguably lead to panpsychism.

If consciousness emerged, arranging subatomic particles into nerve cells
abruptly generates experience at an exact point. The lights are _completely_
_off_ when those same particles are arranged in a _slightly_ different way;
but arrange them as nerve cells, and it’ll feel like something for that matter
to be. So will one nerve cell do it? What about two nerve cells? If your
answer is 357,005 neurons, why wasn’t it 357,004? What’s so special about
nerve cells, anyway? They’re not made of unique material. They’re composed of
the same protons, neutrons, and electrons as anything else. So it must be the
_arrangement_ , right? Of course, I agree that altering the configuration of
matter will alter the contents of experience. But I can’t agree that altering
the configuration of matter will alchemize non-experiential stuff into
experiential stuff.

This is one of the most persuasive and clearly-written articles I’ve read on
the problems involved with trying to fit phenomenal consciousness into a
standard physicalist worldview!

So the argument against physicalism only needs a Realism premise and a
Nonreductionism premise. Some physicalists accept Nonreductionism but reject
Realism; others accept Realism but reject Nonreductionism (the more common
route). I think once you flesh out a reducible form of experience, your
position amounts to a rejection of Realism. I personally think physicalism
leads naturally to illusionism about consciousness, and many physicalists
agree. That’s why I’m not a physicalist. The argument for panpsychism needs
Realism and Nonreductionism as premises, but it also needs Nonemergence and
Monism to block the way to dualism. Again, once we accept Realism and
Nonreductionism, it’s over for physicalism. But if we want to get to
panpsychism, we have to add the Nonemergence and Monism premises.

I honestly don’t understand how any rational person could think these are just
nothing arguments–unless they’re just being dogmatic about their preferred
metaphysical worldview…or they don’t want to admit that they’ve been wrong for
much of their lives.

The arbitrariness objection is certainly an interesting one that I’d like to
see physicalists contend with. However, I think the more serious consequence
of phenomenal precision is the charge of strong emergence. This is for two
reasons. First, I find strong emergence to be deeply implausible.

To say that something emerged weakly is to say that it’s reducible. Weak
emergence is in the business of giving reductive explanation. If a phenomenon
is strongly emergent, that means it’s irreducible. Phenomenal precision, I
think, gives us a hint that experience would have to be strongly emergent. If
we accept that weak emergence is always vague, then it follows that
physicalism doesn’t work.

Third, Nonemergence. Here I need to distinguish between “weak emergence” and
“strong emergence.” Weak emergence is the kind of emergence that’s ubiquitous
in the natural sciences. Atoms emerge from subatomic particles; molecules
emerge from atoms; organisms emerge from molecules; societies emerge from
organisms. At no point is there a _truly_ emergent phenomenon; there are no
new concreta that have been added to the ontological inventory of reality. The
weak sort of emergence is to be distinguished from strong emergence, which,
historically, has simply been called emergence. David Chalmers is a prominent
contemporary emergentist, whose naturalistic dualism makes use of strong
emergence. He thinks that if consciousness emerged, it must have been an
instance of strong emergence. To accept that experience emerged strongly is to
be a dualist in some sense. **Strongly emergent phenomena are not identical
to, reducible to, or deductible from other phenomena.** But on physicalism,
there are no giant leaps in nature that could be characterized as strong
emergence. One cannot simultaneously hold reductive physicalism _and_ the view
that the emergence of experience was a case of strong emergence, since to
claim that a phenomenon can be reduced (or to say that it’s identical to or
constituted by more fundamental parts) is to say that it emerged weakly.

> “Human physiologists may take a special interest in [physical brain events];
> but they can, in principle, be understood just as well, or even better, by
> creatures totally unlike us in physical and mental structure. To understand
> them such creatures need not take up our point of view. Physical brain
> processes can be understood objectively, from the outside, because they are
> not subjective phenomena. And no description or analysis of the objective
> nervous system, however complete, will ever by itself imply anything which
> is not objective.”
>
> Thomas Nagel

By physicalism, I mean reductive physicalism. The sort of physicalist or
materialist I’m concerned with affirms the existence of phenomenal
consciousness, which they believe has emerged from entirely non-experiential
concrete reality. There are more liberal versions of physicalism on offer,
like Strawson’s physicalism, but today, I’m only concerned with physicalism in
the ordinary sense — the kind that asserts that the intrinsic nature of matter
is non-experiential. Some might object to that characterization because they
don’t like the language of intrinsic natures. Maybe they think matter has no
intrinsic nature, that it’s all just structure and behavior. That’s fine, and
it happens to make the case against physicalism even easier. (As a brief
aside, it should be mentioned that a rejection of physicalism does not entail
that one rejects anything about physics or physical science. Many forms of
non-physicalism, certainly my form, are not _in any way_ in conflict with
naturalism, atheism, or physical science.)

Experience is unobservable objectively. If it wasn’t for the fact that we
ourselves are conscious, there would be no evidence that consciousness exists.
No objective description, on its own, will ever imply the existence of
anything that is not objective. We can describe everything about the human
brain and its emergence objectively, but that third-person description will
exclude the first-person point of view, without which it wouldn’t be a
conscious experience at all. How could we bridge this divide without strong
emergence?

> “Any living organism, including a human being, is a complex material system.
> It consists of a huge number of particles combined in a special way. Each of
> us is composed of matter that had a largely inanimate history before finding
> its way onto our plates or those of our parents. It was once probably part
> of the sun, but matter from another galaxy would do as well. If it were
> brought to earth, and grass were grown in it, and milk from a cow that ate
> the grass were drunk by a pregnant woman, then her child’s brain would be
> partly composed of that matter. Anything whatever, if broken down far enough
> and rearranged, could be incorporated into a living system. No constituents
> besides matter are needed.”

Physicalists think experience emerges weakly, in the same sense that biology
and tables and whirlpools emerge. Biology emerges out of chemistry. Liquidity
emerges from molecules which are not liquid. Tables emerge from matter which
is not tables. So we have no trouble getting A from ~A in all sorts of cases.
So why should experience be any different?

my problem with emergence is it makes mental causation impossible. In assuming
that mind derives from matter, the subjective becomes a second class citizen
totally derivative of the more real particles. Since other minds are invisible
entities if they have no efficacy there is no theory of the mind that can ever
make sense since another private conscious being like me can only be theorized
based on its effects. see <https://philpapers.org/rec/SLEPAR> and  
<https://philpapers.org/rec/SLESA>

> “I don’t think that you could arrange mere non-conscious physical stuff in
> such a way that [experience] would spring into existence. That would be what
> we call ‘radical emergence’—it would be like getting concrete things out of
> abstract things.”
>
> _Galen Strawson_

A phenomenon that is the product of strong emergence is not reducible to or
deducible from underlying phenomena. A phenomenon that is the product of weak
emergence _is_ reducible to or deducible from underlying phenomena. And if we
can show that weak emergence is always vague, and establish phenomenal realism
and precision, then that means the emergence of experience must have been a
case of strong emergence. If this is true, physicalism is false. Physicalists
must reject Realism, Precision, or the vagueness of weak emergence to escape.

Physicalists think experience emerged somewhere in the realm of complex
organisms. The precision of the emergence of experience, at this organismal
level, is highly anomalous. We’re not talking about an ordinary case of
emergence here. I don’t think phenomenal precision demonstrates that
experience is definitely irreducible, but I think it’s a hint that it is. If
experience is irreducible, then its emergence (if it emerged) would have the
precise character I’ve been describing. So for physicalists, phenomenal
precision is an anomaly. The transition from objective to subjective is
another anomaly. The lack of an intelligible story is an anomaly.

Second, one who endorses emergence of this sort is no longer a physicalist,
but a dualist. If experience could not have emerged weakly due to phenomenal
precision (i.e. because no smooth gradient of gradual change is possible), and
because our experiences are not merely concepts but concretely real, we have
strong emergence. If we have strong emergence, we no longer have physicalism.

Another distinguishing factor in the case of experience, in addition to the
unique objective/subjective divide, is the ontological status of experience
versus that of a chair or a whirlpool. “Whirlpool” is a useful way of talking
about some concrete reality X. Similarly, “chair” is a convenient concept;
it’s a helpful way of talking about some concrete reality Y. But there’s more
ontological weight to experience than there is to a chair. A chair is a
concept that refers to some concrete reality. Experience, on the other hand,
_is_ the concrete reality — it’s not just a convenient way of talking about
some unknown thing-in-itself to which we have no direct access.

Nothing is non-controversial in philosophy, but I think Realism is a safe
premise. I think Precision is a safe premise. It’s showing that weak emergence
is vague — vague in every case — that is harder to show. It’s easy to show
that weak emergence is usually vague. Especially in the realm where we live,
where consciousness is supposed by physicalists to have emerged (that is, in
the realm of biology, tables and chairs, liquidity, niftiness, and so on). So
those are my three premises: Realism, Phenomenal precision, and the vagueness
of weak emergence.

Finally, we have Monism, which shouldn’t be too controversial with
materialists. To deny Monism, obviously, would be to reject materialism.
However, monism comes in many varieties, not just the materialist variety.
Neutral monists, idealists, and panpsychists endorse Monism. Panpsychists can
even endorse a more specific version of Monism, as Thomas Nagel explains in
his essay Panpsychism (1979). Rather than taking “Monism” as a premise in his
argument, he takes “Material Composition” as a premise.

Allow me to concede that phenomenal consciousness _is_ a concept. Many
physicalists go to great lengths to establish this. I’m happy to grant their
point. What I’m unwilling to grant is that experience is _just_ a concept. It
clearly enjoys concrete existence. Our concept refers to something that is
directly, immediately known by every conscious creature. The reason for
holding, tiresomely, that one’s direct experience is merely an abstraction,
rather than a concrete natural phenomenon, is that it allows physicalists to
pretend to be Realists by way of diminishing the ontological weight of
experience. If one doesn’t want to bite the absurd antirealist bullet, they
may hold that one’s immediate experience is merely a concept. So one can claim
to be a realist about phenomenal consciousness while surreptitiously denying
Realism. I’m not a fake realist about experience. I’m a real realist, which
means I accept experience as the most certainly known, concretely existing
natural phenomenon. To insist otherwise would mean that phenomenal
consciousness is “real” in only a very limited sense. The bottom line: the
experience you’re having right now is not just a convenient way of talking
about the world. It’s really, really real — real in a deeper sense than most
things we’re realists about.

Nagel’s Material Composition premise could work just as well as Monism for our
purposes here. (Strawson, along with other Russellians, has gone to great
lengths explaining how “material composition” is compatible with panpsychism;
indeed, how physicalism, properly understood, is compatible with panpsychism.)

‪(Of course I mean emergent in the weak sense, e.g. in the way that
biochemistry, tables, and whirlpools are emergent. Consciousness could still
be strongly emergent as naturalistic dualists take it to be.‬)

Phenomenal consciousness possesses more ontological weight than chairs or
biology or liquidity. Those are just different vocabularies. Experience, on
the other hand, is not a different way of talking about the same stuff that’s
always been there. If it emerged, it’s something new — something new that’s
concretely real. We’ve added to the ontological inventory of reality in way
disanalogous to biochemistry. Furthermore, this new concrete reality of
experience must have emerged at a _precise_ _moment_ , since it’s not vague
whether or not experience is present. This is not weak emergence. Weak
emergence is not characterized by a sudden leap.

If I had to offer a one-sentence response to the question, “Why aren’t you a
physicalist?” I would borrow Scott Clifton’s (also known as Theoretical
Bullshit) succinct answer when the question was put to him: “Because
consciousness is a thing.”

So we’ve been touching on this throughout, but I want to make my reasoning
more explicit. The key premise here is “Weak emergence is essentially vague.”
If that can be demonstrated, physicalism can be demonstrated to be false. I
can easily defend the premise “Weak emergence is _usually_ vague,” and that
“Weak emergence is vague in the microbiological world in which we live.” But
once we accept that premise, that weak emergence is essentially vague, we only
need accept Realism and Precision to reject physicalism.

Here’s the problem for physicalism: once we grant that experience is real and
irreducible, we can know that physicalism is false. And once we accept we need
strong emergence to get experience, we’ve admitted that experience _is_
irreducible. Saying that a phenomenon emerged weakly is another way of saying
it’s reducible. Weak emergence is in the business of offering reductive
explanation. If we think strong emergence is required, the phenomenon in
question is irreducible. And once we’ve accepted that experience is real and
irreducible, it’s over for physicalism.

[ARTWORK: Greg Dunn](Greg Dunn). _The laminar structure of the cerebellum, a
region involved in movement and proprioception (calculating where your body is
in space)_.

I think Realism entails Precision/Sharpness. Phenomenal precision is the
notion that experience is not vague; it is completely and utterly precise
whether experience is present. For this reason, phenomenal consciousness is
sharp: it doesn’t admit of borderline cases. Put simply, it is either like
something to be or it is not. To see the truth of “it is either like something
to be or it is not,” we need only consider the alternative and try to imagine
a borderline case of experience. Can it “kind of” be like something? No, for
then it is like something. Can it merely “seem” to be like something? No, for
the same reason. Can it “just barely” be like something? It is either like
something to be or it’s not — there’s actually no middle ground to be had
between these two states. Experience is not vague in this sense.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F02%2F15%2Fcan-physicalism-explain-phenomenal-consciousness%2F&signup_flow=account)

Up until this point, I’ve only obliquely referenced the irreducibility of
consciousness. I didn’t explicitly add a Nonreductionism premise because I was
trying to get you to feel the intuition without simply saying that experience
cannot be reduced to parts that are not themselves experiential. That’s what
we’re trying to find out, isn’t it? So I talked about phenomenal precision,
the subjective/objective divide, and the anomalous lack of an intelligible
story of emergence.

> “The demand for continuity has, over large tracts of science, proved itself
> to possess true prophetic power. We ought therefore ourselves sincerely to
> try every possible mode of conceiving the dawn of consciousness so that it
> may not appear equivalent to the irruption into the universe of a new
> nature, non-existent until then. Merely to call the consciousness ‘nascent’
> will not serve our turn. It is true that the word signifies not yet quite
> born, and so seems to form a sort of bridge between existence and nonentity.
> But that is a verbal quibble. The fact is that discontinuity comes in if a
> new nature comes in at all. The quantity of the latter is quite immaterial.
> The girl in ‘Midshipman Easy’ could not excuse the illegitimacy of her child
> by saying, ‘it was a very small one.’ And Consciousness, however small, is
> an illegitimate birth in any philosophy that starts without it, and yet
> professes to explain all facts by continuous evolution. If evolution is to
> work smoothly, consciousness in some shape must have been present at the
> very origin of things. Accordingly we find that the more clear-sighted
> evolutionary philosophers are beginning to posit it there.”
>
> _William James, The Principles of Psychology_

There are a few ideas that, taken together, have led me away from physicalism.
These points could factor into an argument against physicalism; namely, that
ordinary physicalism doesn’t provide us with tools adequate to explain what we
know about our world. The first and most important of these ideas that have
led me away (or astray) is an unshakable realism about phenomenal
consciousness. By phenomenal consciousness, I mean experience: _being_ such
that there’s something that it is like to be. If it’s like something to be,
phenomenal consciousness is present. Realism about experience is, as Galen
Strawson puts it, “the obligatory starting point for any remotely realistic
(indeed any non-self-defeating) theory of what there is.”

> “Very roughly if consciousness does not admit of borderline cases, then we
> will have to suppose that some utterly precise micro-level change—down to an
> exact arrangement of particles—marked the first appearance of consciousness
> (or the change from non-conscious to conscious embryo/foetus), and it is
> going to seem arbitrary that it was that utterly precise change that was
> responsible for this significant change in nature.”
>
> _Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy_

So let us imagine the emergence of experience. There is only unfeeling, non-
experiential physical stuff on the most fundamental levels of our universe.
It’s not like anything for an electron, presumably. There’s no feeling or
sensation, no emotion, no qualitative experience at all, of any kind. Now
follow the plot of emergence that we’ve pieced together from the most
fundamental levels of the universe to the most highly emergent levels. If
we’re starting with, say, subatomic particles, they combine to make atoms,
which combine to make molecules, which combine to make cells and organisms and
so on up the scale. From physics to chemistry, up to microbiology, all the way
to brains, sociology and macro-scale reality. Nothing new is being added at
any point in this upward journey; every level is reducible to the level
beneath it. Chemistry is just another way of talking about physics when you
zoom out a bit. We have a smooth gradient of gradual change all the way up to
brains. But at some point, it becomes like something for this matter from
inside. We go from the fundamental levels, which are made up of non-conscious,
physical material that has no subjective experience; and at some point, we get
conscious physical material that has a subjective point of view, which I’ll
say again, is really, really real. When we go from subatomic particles to
atoms, we’re using a new way of talking about _the same stuff that’s always
been there._ But if we take experience to be real, we cannot say the same of
its emergence. It’s not the same stuff that’s always been there; there’s been
a non-redundant addition to the inventory of reality.

Physicalism, which posits the weak emergence of experience, is in conflict
with Realism. I think in order to accept weak emergence with regards to
experience, you might have to deny Phenomenal precision. Up here in the
biological macro-world, emergence is vague. That the emergence of experience
is precise is a signal that this is not business as usual. This is not how
weak emergence is supposed to work. The physicalist also runs into the problem
that a new, concrete natural phenomenon has appeared, which is entirely
disanalogous from every other case of weak emergence. It’s also entirely
disanalogous because we’ve crossed the objective/subjective divide, and
because we have no intelligible account of how to get from one to the other.
If one wants to remain committed to the idea that consciousness emerged, one
must commit to strong emergence. And to accept strong emergence is to reject
physicalism.

This strange fact about experience (that it is not vague) leads us to a
sorites-style argument against the emergence of consciousness.

Let’s return for a moment to Realism. I take experience to be the most
certainly known real, natural, physical, concrete phenomenon. “Natural” and
“physical” deserve their own discussion, but for now, I want to focus on
concrete. “Concrete” here means “not abstract.” By “abstract,” I’m not
diverging from the usual philosophical sense of abstract, wherein some
philosophers hold that abstract objects — e.g. numbers or concepts — exist and
can safely be considered real. I think experiential goings-on are plainly
concrete and not abstract. It seems absurd to take my direct experience and
claim that it’s merely an abstract concept, but it’s worth taking a moment to
address this increasingly well-worn physicalist escape route.

If you’re a reductionist, you’re committed to the idea that emergence is
really a story of _the same stuff that’s always been there_ evolving into
different processes. But if there was this transition from it not being like
anything to it being like something, that would mean you’re wrong… _unless_
it’s not _really_ like something. It’s not like anything at the fundamental
levels; it’s not really like anything up here. You could say it’s just a
concept, or just a way of talking about different collections of matter.
Speaking in the language of molecules, for example, is just a way of talking
about collections of physical matter arranged molecule-wise. The atom isn’t
some kind of ontologically separate thing from the protons and neutrons and
electrons that constitute it. Atoms are entirely reducible to their component
parts. And crucially, we have an intelligible story of how we get from one to
the other where we can clearly see that it’s the same stuff that’s always been
there. Consciousness, however, is not just another “way of talking about.” It
really looks as though something novel has emerged. If experience emerged, we
have an appearance of an entirely new, concretely real, natural phenomenon.

The emergence of tables and chairs, or liquidity, or biology can be described
in purely structural, behavioral, third-personal terms. We go from one type of
objective description to another type of objective description. We never cross
the divide between objective and subjective, and there’s never a giant leap.

The only way to wriggle out of this and continue to affirm the weak emergence
of experience is to alter our concept of experience, effectively redefining
experience to mean something other than experience. It must be a mere concept,
an illusion, a convenient way of talking about the same stuff that’s always
been there. To affirm any of these is to abandon Realism about experience.
These are all forms of eliminativism; some of them explicit, some of them
semantically obscure.

For all the other examples of weak emergence, we have the same category of
concepts on either side of the emergent divide: we go from objective
description to objective description. But with consciousness, we go from
objective description to subjective description. How many objective
descriptions does it take to add up to a subjective description? How can we
describe _behavior_ in such a way that leads to _experience_ , i.e., how do we
go from third-personal description to first-personal description? At the very
least, there’s an epistemic problem here. But why should we think this
objective/subjective gap is also an ontic gap? Well, it seems impossible in
principle to give an intelligible account of how we go from one to the other.
If subjective reality emerged from non-subjectivity, we should be able to give
an intelligible account of how that happened. We can give a perfectly
intelligible account of how we get from chemistry to biology, from non-tables
to tables, from non-liquid molecules to liquidity. But how do we bridge the
objective and subjective? How can we start with third-person, objective
description and end up at first-person, subjective description? Physicalists
need to do more than simply appeal to unrelated examples of successful
reduction and cases of weak emergence without explaining why we should think
the emergence of experience was also a case of weak emergence. Look, I don’t
need all the details. Just the broad strokes will do! To quote David Chalmers,
“[Reductive physicalists] will have to give us some idea of how the existence
of consciousness might be entailed by physical facts. While it is not fair to
expect all the details, one at least needs an account of how such an
entailment might _possibly_ go.” All I want is an intelligible explanation of
how we get from non-experiential reality to experiential reality, just like we
have an intelligible explanation of the examples commonly mentioned. In those
cases, we have a smooth gradient of gradual change. How could this be true of
the emergence of experience, given phenomenal precision?

Physicalism seems to be unable to explain phenomenal consciousness, since it
would require us to redefine consciousness in a way tantamount to its denial.
(Nonreductive physicalists are a little better off, since they don’t deny the
most certainly known natural phenomenon, but their nonreductive position
amounts to dualism of one kind or another.)

Phenomenal precision is one reason experience is different from tables and
chairs, biology and beards, piles of sand and when the day becomes the night.
It’s vague when sand becomes a pile of sand. There is no precise moment the
day becomes the night. There is no single hair that turns stubble into
beardness. There is no particulate change in the construction of a chair when
we cross the chair/not-a-chair dividing line. There are borderline cases: I
could continually deform a chair, and when it ceases to be a chair is vague.
Any point you choose will be arbitrary. But as we’ve seen, it is either like
something to be or it is not. There is no smooth gradient of gradual change
that ordinarily marks weak emergence at this level. I couldn’t start with
consciousness and continually deform it until it wasn’t really clear whether
it was conscious or not. (This is one reason functionalism is probably not
true, since functions are essentially vague.)

In his book, [Ethical Intuitionism](https://www.amazon.com/Ethical-
Intuitionism-M-
Huemer/dp/0230573746/ref=sr_1_1?crid=8CEYB73OM4PJ&keywords=ethical+intuitionism+huemer&qid=1663122578&s=books&sprefix=ethical+intuitionism+huemer%2Cstripbooks%2C75&sr=1-1),
Huemer argues that there are exactly five metaethical positions:

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [debate](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debate/),
[error theory](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/error-theory/),
[ethical intuitionism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ethical-
intuitionism/),
[explained](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/explained/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/),
[interview](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/interview/),
[metaethics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/metaethics/), [michael
huemer](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/michael-huemer/), [moral
antirealism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-antirealism/),
[moral naturalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-
naturalism/), [moral non-
naturalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-non-
naturalism-2/), [moral
realism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-realism/),
[podcast](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/podcast/), [walden
pod](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/walden-pod/)

On the other hand, if you think “Torturing an infant for fun is wrong” is an
objectively true statement, you’re a moral realist. So, if you think it’s
neither true nor false, you’re an antirealist. If you think it’s false, you’re
an antirealist. If you think it’s true, but only in the sense that some people
prefer the “torturing infants for fun” ice cream while others prefer the “not
torturing babies for fun” ice cream, then you’re an antirealist. Finally, if
you take the spooky, unscientific, illogical, rationally indefensible view
that some things are actually right and other things are wrong, you’re a moral
realist. Whether you think evaluative truths are reducible to descriptive
truths or whether you think they’re irreducible divides the realists into the
fourth and fifth camps — naturalists and non-naturalists/intuitionists.

Michael Huemer recently joined me to talk about metaethics, moral realism vs.
antirealism, and his own preferred theory of ethical intuitionism. We also
touched on evolutionary debunking arguments, companions in guilt, ‘moral
platonism’, widespread moral disagreement, moral fictionalism, mistakes
skeptics often make, and much else in moral philosophy.

**Subjectivism:** Some moral statements are true, but not objectively. For a
thing to be good is for some individual or group to (be disposed to) take some
attitude towards it.

**Moral Non-Naturalism/Intuitionism:** There are objective moral properties,
and they are irreducible. Evaluative truths are not reducible to descriptive
truths. Additionally, at least some moral truths are known intuitively.

**Noncognitivism/expressivism:** Moral statements are neither true nor false.
Evaluative predicates do not even purportedly refer to any sort of property,
nor do evaluative statements assert propositions.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F09%2F21%2Fethical-intuitionism-w-michael-huemer%2F&signup_flow=account)

Why are these the only five broad options? Take a moral statement, like
“Torturing an infant for fun is wrong.” This is either (1) neither true nor
false, (2) false, or (3) true. If it’s true, the next question is whether you
think it’s true in the sense that realists intend — objectively true. If
something is _objectively_ the case, then it doesn’t matter how anyone feels
about it, reacts to it, or whether they even know about it. Its truth is
independent of observers. While a statement like “Vanilla ice cream is better
than chocolate” could be true, its truth would constitutively depend on
reactions, attitudes, feelings, etc. It could be _true_ , but not objectively;
it could be true for me but not for you. Likewise, one could think that the
truth of a moral statement depends on observers. This would make you a
subjectivist.

**Moral Naturalism:** There are objective moral properties, but they are
reducible. Evaluative truths are reducible to descriptive truths.
Additionally, moral statements can be justified empirically.

**Error theory/nihilism:** Moral statements (that imply that something has an
evaluative property) are all false.

[“Religion is at the intersection of everything I care about” Interview w/
Sentientism ](https://youtu.be/e9iuwVIXDZc)This was a very wide-ranging
conversation I had with the host of the Sentientism podcast on my personal
background, young earth creationism, naturalism and how it’s defined, moral
realism, ethical intuitionism, divine command theory as a form of moral
subjectivism, animal ethics, the moral implications of panpsychism, and lots
of other stuff about what’s real and what matters.

followed by Dustin Crummett’s response video, [What can we do about wild
animal suffering? ](https://youtu.be/gbCAW_fKNQE)

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F08%2F21%2Fnew-stuff-hot-off-the-press%2F&signup_flow=account)

[How did religion evolve? – w/ Naturalism Next](https://youtu.be/ARPxNYNgiSc).
We discuss “the cognitive science argument against theism” and the
evolutionary origins of religious belief and practice.

I’ve been very active in the last month or so, despite the relative quiet on
this blog. Here’s what I’ve been up to:

Based on the definitions on this article, I think you’re an agnostic calling
yourself an atheist.

Great analysis. Layman atheists fail to grasp some simple concepts and make
fatal mistakes like defining atheism as a lack of belief and mixing
agnosticism with atheism.

Calling yourself an “agnostic atheist” is nonsensical. If you’re an atheist,
you think the proposition “God does not exist” is more likely true than not.
It’s that simple. If you’re a theist, it’s because you judge the proposition
“God exists” to be more likely than not. If you’re an agnostic, it’s either
because you’re withholding judgement and not assigning a credence to the
proposition for whatever reason, _or_ because you judge the evidence to be
roughly counterbalanced (i.e., your credence is roughly .5). Being an atheist
or a theist doesn’t require one to make totally irrational claims to absolute
certainty! Certainty is not the bar for knowledge (or for making a claim). It
never has been.

Whether you say you _know_ God exists or doesn’t exist depends entirely on
your conception of knowledge. But if you believe God exists, to any degree,
you’re a theist. If you’re pretty sure God doesn’t exist, you’re an atheist.
If you’re absolutely certain God doesn’t exist, you need to rethink that, but
you’re an atheist. If you think God doesn’t exist, but you can’t prove it with
certainty, you’re an atheist. The bottom line is that _if you think the
proposition “God doesn’t exist” is more likely true than not, you’re an
atheist._

Can you be an “agnostic atheist,” or are those terms mutually exclusive? I try
to explain how the famous four quadrant graph misunderstands the nature of
belief, knowledge, and agnosticism.

Take _“My car is parked outside.”_ I accept that proposition, so I _believe_
my car is parked outside.

I think a desire for intellectual humility is what drives a lot of atheists to
call themselves “agnostic atheists.” That’s a good thing. But you don’t need
to claim to be 100% certain that God does not exist in order to be an atheist.
Nor do theists need absolute certainty to believe in God. You can be an
atheist who just says “God probably does not exist.” In fact, that’s the
normal way of being an atheist. That’s how most atheists, academic and non-
academic, use the term.

I know my car is parked outside, but I can’t be absolutely certain. Think
about how screwed up our language would be if we could only use the word
“knowledge” in cases where we had absolute certainty. We would never use the
word “knowledge,” except in a handful of cases, like knowledge about my own
mental states or basic logical truths. Again, certainty is not a necessary
condition for knowledge. An agnostic is not defined as someone who claims to
have anything less than absolute certainty in a proposition.

One thing that’s clear is that on this conception of knowledge, and many
others, you can have knowledge without having absolute certainty in your
belief, which is why this is relevant to the graph. Regardless of your
analysis of knowledge, it’s widely agreed that certainty is not a necessary
condition for knowledge. In order to say we know a proposition to be true or
false, we don’t need 100% certainty in our belief. Certainty is not a
necessary condition for knowledge.

We haven’t said anything about _certainty_. Certainty would be having a
credence of 1, or 100%. No one in epistemology thinks that you’re an agnostic
if you have less than absolute certainty in a proposition. That’s just not
what the word means. If you assign a credence of .99 to the proposition “God
does not exist,” you’re not an agnostic. You’re an atheist.

“It just means I don’t think you have sufficient reason to make a claim.” —>
“Another way you can be an agnostic is by withholding judgement. Here, one
simply refrains from assigning a credence or likelihood to the proposition.”

1 is absolute certainty that God exists. 7 is absolute certainty that God does
not exist. A person around 4 is an agnostic. And there are gradations between
those points. This is actually much closer to the way philosophers of religion
approach the issue than the four quadrant graph, which really should just be
discarded. Dawkins’ labels and descriptions for these different points muddy
things up a bit, but the general approach here of assigning a _credence_ to a
proposition, talking in terms of _likelihood_ or _probability_ is a much
better way of approaching these issues. Dawkins’ point when he came up with
this scale was that being at a 7 or a 1 was silly. You can be at a 6-point-
something, but it’s irrational to go to a 7.

If your belief is justified but not true, it seems wrong to say you have
knowledge. You might have really good reasons supporting your belief that no
one can refute. But if it’s not true, it’s not knowledge. So having a
_justified belief_ is not enough.

We need a _justified true belief_ in order to say we have knowledge (on this
view). There’s something called the Gettier problem that seems to undermine
this, but the JTB conception of knowledge is still a good jumping-off point. A
lot of the controversies surrounding JTB have to do with adding another
condition to the three already mentioned, asking what counts as justification,
or otherwise adding to or modifying JTB. So, like I said, it’s a good place to
start if you want to think more about this issue. Like everything else in
philosophy, figuring out what constitutes knowledge is more complicated
business than you might think. (I’d recommend Michael Huemer’s book,
_Knowledge, Reality, and Value: A Mostly Common Sense Guide to Philosophy_ if
you’re looking for a pain-free discussion of this and many other complicated
issues in philosophy.)

So first, agnosticism. There are two main ways one can be an agnostic. [(This
classification is based on Joe Schmid’s
classification.)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YTsSW7UeZpY&t=212s)

If your belief is true but not justified, it also seems wrong to say you have
knowledge. If you correctly believe that the earth orbits the sun and not the
other way around, but you only believe so because it’s raining outside, you
might have a true belief, but you have no good justification for your belief.
You just got lucky. So having a _true belief_ is not enough.

Richard Dawkins actually provided a much more useful way of approaching the
issue than the four quadrant graph: the Dawkins Scale.

You can’t be an agnostic _and_ an atheist. The proposition in question is “God
does not exist.” If you think “God does not exist,” is more likely true than
not, you’re an atheist. If you think the evidence is roughly counterbalanced,
you’re an agnostic. If you don’t assign a likelihood at all to the
proposition, you’re an agnostic of a different sort. But you can’t
simultaneously think “God does not exist” is more probable than not _and_
think it’s 50/50. These are mutually exclusive positions. And, of course, if
you think “God does not exist” is probably false, you’re a theist.

As an aside, I’ve also seen some funny ideas about the notion of “making a
claim.” Like, “I’m an atheist, but I don’t claim God doesn’t exist.” That is
an incoherent sentence. _Claim_ is a bit like _belief_ : it’s not as big of a
deal as you might think. Making a claim doesn’t require one to have certainty.
My claim is that it’s more probable than not that God does not exist. If
you’re an atheist, you’re implicitly making a claim about God’s existence.

I’m not an agnostic. I’m not an “agnostic atheist.” I’m an atheist because I
believe the proposition “God does not exist,” is more likely true than not.

Another way you can be an agnostic is by withholding judgement. Here, one
simply refrains from assigning a credence or likelihood to the proposition.
Someone might favor this option for different reasons. Maybe they’re an “in-
principle agnostic,” and think it’s impossible to assign a credence to the
proposition in principle. Alternatively, maybe they don’t feel comfortable in
making a judgement, for whatever reason, so they don’t assign a credence. We
could split those into two different types of agnostic (a suspension agnostic
and an in-principle agnostic), but what they have in common is that they both
withhold judgement and don’t assign a likelihood to the proposition in
question.

Here’s the proposition in question: God exists. Which best characterizes your
view? Strongly agree, agree, not sure, disagree, strongly disagree. I land
somewhere between disagree and strongly disagree, hence “God probably does not
exist.”

To be clear, the chart is somewhat ambiguous. I’m mostly working off of the
claims of those who use the chart. Often, when they say, “But do you _know_
God doesn’t exist?” what they mean is “Are you _certain_ God doesn’t exist?”
They also tend to have some mistaken ideas about the notion of “belief” and
“claim,” as well as agnosticism.

This is a great piece, I loved reading it, but I have an issue with your
repeated definition of atheism as ‘someone who thinks its more likely a god
doesnt exist than does’ … thats not true, not to my understanding.. correct me
if im wrong, please! But as I understand it atheism is simply the lack of a
belief in a god. It doesnt tell you anything about the likelyhood the
individual thinks of there being no God. Only that they dont believe that
there is one. Its not quite the same thing. I am an atheist, i.e who doesn’t
think that I have any reason to believe in a God, therefore from where does
this claim of probability come from? I simply do not hold the belief that a
God exists until such a moment comes where someone provides me evidence either
that there is or isnt. That is hardly a position of stating that God is not
likely to exist. I do believe that, too, but my point is my atheism alone
doesnt tell you anything about that.

Beliefs can be held with different kinds of conviction: some atheists are
certain that god doesn’t exist, some atheists are very strongly persuaded that
god doesn’t exist, some atheists are fairly sure that god doesn’t exist, some
atheists are only slightly swayed in favor of there being no gods. What they
have in common is that they all believe, with some degree of confidence, the
proposition “God does not exist.”

One way to be an agnostic is to judge the scales to be balanced somewhat
equally. You take the probability of a proposition to be roughly 50%, or .5.
In other words, you think the evidence is roughly counterbalanced. (Maybe
somewhere between .4 and .6 confidence in a given proposition.)

So one way you could be an agnostic is to withhold assigning a credence at
all; another way would be taking the evidence to be roughly counterbalanced.
_An agnostic is not one who claims to have anything less than absolute
certainty._ An agnostic is someone who thinks the evidence is roughly
counterbalanced or doesn’t even assign a credence to the proposition.

That’s exactly what I’m inveighing against here. Atheism is not just a lack of
belief, at least according to virtually all academic philosophical sources on
the subject.

So what about the supposed dichotomy between belief and knowledge? Well, it
can make sense to say “I have a belief, but not knowledge.” You _can_ have a
belief without having knowledge, since your belief might not meet the
conditions for knowledge (e.g. being a justified true belief). However, it
makes no sense at all to say “I have knowledge, but not a belief.” Again, if
you have a belief, that does _not_ mean you have no evidence, or you take it
on faith, or anything like that. It just means you affirm a proposition.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F04%2F22%2Fwhat-the-agnostic-atheist-graph-gets-wrong%2F&signup_flow=account)

Absolute certainty is not an option available to mature believers or non-
believers. All we can do is to disagree about which way the balance of
considerations tilts. I think the task at hand is to construct competing
models that explain the world we see, then compare our competing models and
ask which does a better job explaining the data, all things considered.

A lot of these discussions fail to get off the ground because of confusion
around the notion of _belief_. Belief, in these contexts, is not quite as
significant as many people take it to be. Belief is just a matter of accepting
a proposition. That’s how epistemologists and philosophers use the term. It
doesn’t mean you have _faith_ in the proposition, it doesn’t mean you have no
evidence for the proposition; it just means you accept or affirm the
proposition.

The problem with this four-quadrant graph is that it’s working with a
completely misleading idea of what “agnostic” means and what “knowledge”
means. It seems to conflate knowledge with certainty, and it implies that
agnosticism is when one has less than 100% certainty about a proposition.
Those are not small mistakes. And they render the whole chart useless,
unfortunately.

Some people go so far as to claim that they don’t have beliefs, or that having
beliefs is somehow irrational. But again, “belief” just means you accept a
proposition, like “There is a rather large cat on my couch.” You have beliefs!
You believe the earth goes around the sun, because you accept the proposition
“The earth goes around the sun.” You don’t _just_ lack a belief in
geocentrism; you think it’s false. (In fact, I would say you _know_ it’s
false, even though you can’t have absolute certainty that it’s false.)

A related concept in a discussion like this is _knowledge_. There’s a much-
discussed conception of knowledge, that of “justified true belief.” On this
view, you have knowledge if and only if you have a justified true belief.

No, though. Me saying I disagree with your statement about God existing
doesn’t mean I think he doesn’t or is likely not to exist. It just means I
don’t think you have sufficient reason to make a claim. I aknowledge that I
also don’t have significant reason to make a claim such as ‘God does not
exist’

I wont be able to rephrase it any differently so if you dont catch my drift I
doubt you will

  2. Pingback: [CA82 What the ‘agnostic atheist’ graph gets wrong | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2021/04/25/ca82-what-the-agnostic-atheist-graph-gets-wrong/)

Intellectual humility is important, and I think that’s the real motivation
behind the chart. Thoughtful non-believers don’t want to make any irrational
claims to certainty, or signal that they’re closed off to the possibility that
they’re wrong. That’s a good thing, but that’s not really the issue at hand.
Very few atheists would assign a credence of 100% to the proposition “Goes
does not exist.” The word for a person who claims absolute certainty here
should be “moron,” not “gnostic atheist.” Unfortunately, I know a lot of
theists who say they’re absolutely certain that their preferred form of theism
is true. But certainty is not on the table for anyone.

On the topic of ending suffering, are you familiar with the Qualia Research
Institute, and if so, do you think their ideas and goals are at all feasible?

> “In short, a land ethic changes the role of _Homo sapiens_ from conqueror of
> the land-community to plain member and citizen of it. It implies respect for
> his fellow-members, and also respect for the community as such. In human
> history, we have learned (I hope) that the conqueror role is eventually
> self-defeating. Why? Because it is implicit in such a role that the
> conqueror knows, _ex cathedra_ , just what makes the community clock tick,
> and just what and who is valuable, and what and who is worthless, in
> community life. It always turns out that he knows neither, and this is why
> his conquests eventually defeat themselves. In the biotic community, a
> parallel situation exists. Abraham knew exactly what the land was for: it
> was to drip milk and honey into Abraham’s mouth. At the present moment, the
> assurance with which we regard this assumption is inverse to the degree of
> our education. The ordinary citizen today assumes that science knows what
> makes the community clock tick; the scientist is equally sure that he does
> not. He knows that the biotic mechanism is so complex that its workings may
> never be fully understood.”

An argument that some animal rights activists will defend (though, in my
experience, it’s also defended by _opponents_ of animal rights) is that we
should, as a matter of consistency, try to intervene in wild animal suffering.
“Well, if I take a vegan’s moral principles seriously, then why should my
concern stop with industrial farming? Wild animals arguably have it just as
bad – if not much worse – than farmed animals. A consistent vegan would try to
stop predators from eating animals!” The argument is that if the ethical
principles espoused by animal welfare advocates are applied consistently, then
they’d be committed to intervening in nature, trying to prevent predators from
killing and eating prey. But that’s absurd, so we can reject the principles
defended by vegans and vegetarians. It’s crazy to stop a lion from eating a
gazelle, so I can go to McDonald’s later guilt-free. At least, that’s how it
goes with the opponents of animal rights – it’s a reductio meant to invalidate
vegan moral principles. There are, however, many vegans who argue that we
ought to reduce wild animal suffering as well. The argument is similar in both
cases: The general principles that inform our concern for animal welfare
shouldn’t be arbitrarily limited to animals that aren’t living in the wild.

“Ought implies can” is a plausible moral principle: If you can’t do it, then
you’re not obligated to do it. For instance, no one can find fault in you for
failing to do something that would be physically impossible. In the absence of
some very surprising future technology, we cannot end animal predation. For
the sake of argument, though, let’s say such technology did arrive. Gene
editing is more and more of a reality, and gene drives make it possible to
alter the genetic character of entire populations relatively quickly. It’s not
as if it would violate the laws of physics to alter the genes of predators
such that their physical and psychological attributes were not aimed at
savagely killing and eating other sentient creatures. Science-fictiony, sure.
But it’s not impossible.

However, even with such technology, we can’t end animal predation without
causing a massive disruption in the ecosystem. We’re talking about drastically
altering central attributes of a very complex, interconnected, dynamic,
highly-emergent system. Even if eliminating predation was realistic,
eliminating predation _and_ expecting everything else to remain fixed in place
is fairly absurd. It would make the asteroid that killed the dinosaurs look
like a footnote in earth’s history! One of the lessons of climate change, I
thought, was that relatively subtle changes, like slightly altering the
composition of the atmosphere, could lead to dramatic consequences. Given the
interconnectedness of the natural order, waving a technological wand and
eliminating predation would plausibly cause the entire system to collapse into
nonexistence. It would be like surgically removing the spine of an elephant
and expecting everything else to carry on as before. Even if eliminating
predation while still feeding predators was realistic, doing so and expecting
everything else to remain fixed in place is not.

My instincts are that human intervention in nature is guilty until proven
innocent. A very high burden must be met, and this can probably only be
achieved in cases of relatively minor alleviations of wild animal suffering.
I’m not against the idea in principle. Many of the arguments against
intervention in wild animal suffering are no good. (I haven’t discussed the
most common ones here because they’re so terrible.) I agree with Peter Singer,
who argued that “if it is in our power to prevent something bad from
happening, without thereby sacrificing anything of comparable moral
importance, we ought, morally, to do it.” I just don’t think it is within our
power to do it. [Neither does
Singer:](https://www.nybooks.com/articles/1973/06/14/food-for-thought/)

Although I do believe that if humanity survives long enough and continues to
advance technologically, we truly may have the power to end devastating
suffering altogether, at least within a relatively large swath of the
observable universe. Maybe.

For me, this is the main argument. Aldo Leopold, the American conservationist
and environmentalist, summarized the concern like this near the end of _A Sand
County Almanac: With other essays on conservation from Round River_ :

> TL;DR
>
> [Wild animal suffering](https://audioboom.com/posts/8127169-56-we-probably-
> shouldn-t-do-anything-about-wild-animal-suffering) – is it possible to do
> anything about it? _Should_ we do anything about it? Even though the general
> principles that inform our concern for animal welfare shouldn’t be
> arbitrarily limited to animals outside the wild, I think intervention on any
> serious scale would be ill-advised. The natural order is deeply
> interconnected, dynamic, and awesomely complex. Drastic action, such as
> ending predation, would plausibly cause the system to collapse into
> nonexistence or end in some other irreversible catastrophe. Sadly, natural
> evil is inextricably built into the biological order.

> “…for practical purposes I am fairly sure, judging from man’s past record of
> attempts to mold nature to his own aims, that we would be more likely to
> increase the net amount of animal suffering if we interfered with wildlife,
> than to decrease it.”

It is unfortunate that God, in his infinite wisdom, designed a biological
order with evil built into the very structure of creation, but it’s not within
our power to bring an end to predation. It _is_ within our power to bring an
end to an unusual cultural practice that didn’t exist until somewhat recently:
factory farming. What’s more, we’re actually responsible for that.

Tagged [aldo leopold](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aldo-
leopold/), [animal ethics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-
ethics/), [animal
liberation](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-liberation-2/),
[animal rights](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-rights/),
[animal welfare](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-welfare/),
[enviromentalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/enviromentalism/),
[ethics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ethics/), [factory
farming](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/factory-farming/), [moral
philosophy](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-philosophy/),
[peter singer](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/peter-singer/),
[veganism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/veganism/),
[vegetarianism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vegetarianism/),
[wild animal suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/wild-
animal-suffering/)

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F07%2F25%2Fwe-probably-shouldnt-do-anything-about-wild-animal-suffering%2F&signup_flow=account)

There are many things wrong with this line of argument. First, it’s not clear
that a consistent vegan, concerned with the suffering of animals, should feel
rationally compelled to intervene in wild animal suffering. It’s true that
predation, starvation, and so on have been responsible for an unimaginable
amount of suffering over the generations of life on earth. But (in addition to
not being a consequence of human action in the first place) that’s not within
our power to prevent. On the other hand, human beings _are_ responsible for
the existence of factory farming, and it’s entirely within our power to bring
that monstrosity to an end. Unlike industrial farming, predation, starvation,
parasitism, and so on did not result from decisions made by human beings. So
one could argue that since we’re not responsible for it, we don’t have an
obligation to solve it. Secondly, and more importantly, they could argue that
it’s not within our power to ameliorate it even if we decided to do something
about it.

[Listen to this post on Walden Pod. 36 – Is love just a chemical
reaction?](https://audioboom.com/posts/7866220-36-tunnel-vision-reductionism-
is-love-just-a-chemical-reaction)

It’s inevitable that one who calls out reductionism of any sort will be viewed
with a certain amount of suspicion. You might find yourself being accused of
ignorance, or romanticism, or of harboring some anti-scientific prejudice.
Nevertheless I want to address a common type of reductionism, which I’ll call
[tunnel vision
reductionism](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q5QJdUMh-0A&t=1s).

The basic problem with tunnel vision reductionism is that it has a narrow and
inconsistent notion of “real.” Neurons are taken to be real, but emotions are
illusory (or at least, less real than neurons). Both are considered emergent,
higher-level phenomena, but for some reason, the former is the _true_
description. But if love isn’t real because it’s a higher-level description,
then neurons aren’t real either! Neither are chemicals like oxytocin.

When it’s said that “Love is just a chemical reaction,” or “Humans are just
bags of chemicals,” it’s the “just” that I have a problem with. Love _is_ a
chemical reaction—it is not _just_ a chemical reaction. Tunnel vision
reductionists take one description of reality and declare it to be the _real_
description of reality to the exclusion of all others. At the very least, the
given lower level of description is considered “more true” than higher-level
descriptions. These reductionists arbitrarily eliminate every other
description of the world except one, then act as if they’re the only ones with
the courage to look the hard truth straight in the face. However, if we
describe the biochemical correlates of love, we haven’t described everything
there is to know about love, nor have we given the “real” description of love.
We’ve provided _a_ description (one that’s often useful), but there are many
legitimate ways of talking about our world – scientific and non-scientific.
Even strictly in the realm of scientific inquiry, it doesn’t make sense to
choose one way of talking about reality to the exclusion of all others.

“But all this only works if we reject reductive materialism, right?” No! This
is true _especially if_ one accepts reductive materialism. On reductive
materialism, the feeling of love and the chemistry of oxytocin are both real
in _exactly_ the same way.

Carroll defends a view he calls “[poetic
naturalism](https://www.preposterousuniverse.com/poetic-naturalism/),” wherein
“there is only one world, [but] many ways of talking about the world.” Ways of
talking about the world include different theories, models, vocabularies,
stories, and so on. According to Carroll, “if a particular way of talking
turns out to be sufficiently accurate and useful, the elements in its
corresponding vocabulary deserve to be called _real_.” Poetic naturalism is
very nearly the opposite of tunnel vision reductionism. (One additional
instance of the latter: I once spoke to a follower of Ayn Rand who repeatedly
insisted that a romantic relationship is “just a transaction.” Though a
relationship is in some sense transactional, I dare say there’s a bit more
going on than that.)

  1. Pingback: [The Dead — Where Are They? 2 Scientific Answer | Bijbelvorser = Bible Researcher](https://bijbelvorser.wordpress.com/2021/05/22/the-dead-where-are-they-2-scientific-answer/)

> “When we talk about air in a room, we can describe it by listing the
> properties of each and every molecule, or we speak in coarse-grained terms
> about things like temperature and pressure. . . . It would be silly to say
> that temperature isn’t ‘real,’ just because the concept doesn’t appear in
> some fine-grained vocabulary. We talk about the world using different levels
> of description, appropriate to the question of interest. . . . Does baseball
> exist? It’s nowhere to be found in the Standard Model of particle physics.
> But any definition of ‘exist’ that can’t find room for baseball seems overly
> narrow to me.”
>
> Sean Carroll, [_Free will is as real as
> baseball_](https://www.preposterousuniverse.com/blog/2011/07/13/free-will-
> is-as-real-as-baseball/)

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F05%2F13%2Ftunnel-vision-reductionism%2F&signup_flow=account)

This poor imitation of real reductionism is based on the fallacious idea that
lower levels of description – in this case, the neurobiological one – are
somehow truer, or even the only true ones. Higher-level descriptions, like the
ones that include purposes and mental states, are mere illusions. But why stop
at the neurobiological level? Why not say that neurons are also illusions,
since they are actually made of atoms? But wait! Atoms too are illusions,
since they are really made of electrons and quarks. Real reductionists
recognize that different languages are useful for different purposes. It’s
silly to say that some aren’t real because they’re emergent (non-fundamental).
If the experience of love isn’t real, then neither is the chemistry underlying
it.

Two reasons this naïve reductionist tendency is elevated to pet-peeve status
for me is (1) If you criticize it, you’ll sound irrational and anti-science to
many, as if you can’t handle the cold hard truth. (2) Those who affirm this
reductionism, while they’re denying the complexity of reality to make it
easier for them to grasp, appoint themselves as the defenders of science and
reason. They’re pretending the universe is less than it really is in order to
make it simpler to comprehend. If all of human life is really just game theory
or chemical reactions, then it’s a lot easier to wrap your head around it. If
the one true key to understanding lies in evolutionary theory, or the
biochemistry of this or the behavioral psychology of that, then the world
becomes a rational place that’s less challenging to decipher and far less
shrouded in chaos and mystery. They sacrifice the truth for a comforting lie,
and manage to _reverse_ that charge on those who point it out!

If you assert that “Love is just a chemical reaction,” and take that to be the
_real_ description, then what are you saying about the evolutionary
description? Or the behavioral description? Let alone the first-person,
subjective description. None of these are biochemical or neurobiological
descriptions, and yet, I still think they’re true. To hone in on one useful
description to the exclusion of all others is indefensible. Especially when
the description _is itself_ a higher-level description, which, by the lights
of the tunnel vision reductionist, means it’s not real! Their notion of “real”
is far too narrow, but it’s also inconsistent. If love isn’t real because it’s
a higher-level description of reality, then neurons aren’t real either.

Tunnel vision reductionism carves the natural world down to a sliver of what
it is in actuality. After it’s safely been diminished to something more
manageable (e.g. behavioral economics, computation, game theory, neurobiology,
evolutionary psychology), building a worldview is a much simpler task.

It’s one thing to create something that can be misused to cause suffering.
Someone can drown in a bathtub, but it’s not as if the tub has a malevolent
purpose or function. But a predator’s physical and psychological attributes
are aimed at savaging conscious creatures. It’s not an unfortunate by-product,
or a misuse of some ability, or a perversion of nature. Evil has been built
into the very structure of nature.

In my rebuttal, I look forward to responding to the arguments that John has
brought to the fore. But first I’d like to build a positive case of my own. I
am going to present a few arguments in support of the claim that God probably
does not exist.

I think of myself both as an atheist and a naturalist. Naturalists believe
“that reality is exhausted by nature, containing nothing ‘supernatural’.”
There is only the natural world. Naturalism, then, entails that there is no
supernatural being such as God. Whereas, theists believe that in addition to
the natural world – which is common ground between us – there is also a
conscious, personal designer of our world: An unsurpassably great being of
perfect love.

**(2)** _Divine Hiddenness._ God’s existence is not apparent to many millions
of people, even those who are open to having a relationship with God. They
simply find themselves not believing, involuntarily, through no fault of their
own. We can call this the phenomenon of “reasonable nonbelief.” (If you don’t
think there are any reasonable nonbelievers, you need to get out more.) What
best explains this fact of rational nonbelief in God?

A range of the data of human experience is _more expected_ and _better
explained_ by naturalism than by theism:

_Teleological evil_ occurs in virtue of the natural purpose of a thing. It is
suffering caused by organisms acting in accordance with one or more of their
natural purposes or their design plan. The biological order – for which God is
ultimately responsible – features much teleological evil.

Vast numbers of organisms are designed such that they cannot survive unless
they savagely kill and devour each other. Predators _could have_ instead been
scavengers, or herbivores, or some other kind of organism that absorbs energy
without tearing sentient creatures limb from limb. An unimaginable amount of
suffering visited upon confused sentient creatures could have easily been
avoided if God existed.

One final word on this “unknown reasons” strategy that many theists adopt when
faced with tragic suffering. Thomas Nagel once wrote of the problem of evil,
“Even if a theist supposes that the problem has a solution that we humans are
unable to grasp, that would mean that God, who created us with the capacity to
discover the laws of nature and to find the world scientifically intelligible,
has made us incapable of finding the world morally intelligible. These are
powerful reasons for doubt, and they have certainly destroyed the faith of
some believers.” To those theists who appeal to reasons unknown to us, at
least we can agree that the world seems morally unintelligible.

Here, we’re trying to decide which model best explains the data – as in, which
does a better job of predicting our observations with the fewest assumptions.
It’s clear that if our observations are entailed by one model, but not a rival
model, then it follows that we have evidence favoring the first model over its
rival, since the first assigns a higher probability to our observation than
the second.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F06%2F27%2Fgod-probably-doesnt-exist%2F&signup_flow=account)

_Here’s my opening statement from the recent debate with John Buck on God’s
existence:_

**(4)** _Animal Suffering in Evolutionary History._ There’s an additional
reason evolution is surprising on theism relative to naturalism (probably a
far more important reason). For hundreds of millions of years, an unimaginable
amount of predation, carnivory, starvation, parasitism, languishing, death,
fear and pain has taken place on earth. This is due entirely to God’s choice
to bring about his creation through the pitiless process of evolution. _This_
is the way a perfectly loving being brings about his creation? He could have
created the biological world in many different ways, including ways in which
many millions of Christians already believe he did, _without_ hundreds of
millions of years of animal suffering that could have been avoided entirely.

On the naturalist view, theists disagree about important religious questions
for the same reasons that people wear different kinds of clothes and speak
different languages: Geography, familial groups, peer groups, cultural
surroundings, and so on. Theists, on the other hand, have to believe that God
is trying to tell us the right answer, yet somehow, the answer is unclear. God
_could have_ communicated in such a way that there was no ambiguity, or
designed our minds such that we naturally intuit the right answer. And since
he desires what’s best for us, he has reason to dispel confusion on this
matter of unmatched importance. Clearly, the observation of soteriological
confusion is evidence favoring naturalism over theism.

**(1)** _Soteriological Confusion._ Salvation is a common feature of theism.
Some will be saved, and others will not. That’s a common belief among theists
– _far_ more common than the belief that all shall be saved in the end.
Further, theists often imagine the consequences of lacking salvation to be
eternally significant, involving everything from annihilation to eternal
torment. Once again, very few accept universalism of any kind. Put simply, the
stakes couldn’t be higher. According to the vast majority of theists, an
unmatched _catastrophe_ will result from lacking salvation. That’s terrifying
enough, but worse is that theists do not agree on what’s necessary for
salvation. So most agree that salvation is necessary to avoid terrible
catastrophe, but they do not agree – minor detail – on how to get salvation.

**(5)** _Teleological Evil._ Typically, naturalists believe that evolution by
natural selection accounts for the design of the biological order – at least
the broad strokes. Natural selection can at least help us explain the general
shape of the biological order. There are other forces at work, but it’s not as
if there’s an unsurpassably great being that had anything to do with
evolution, on naturalism. And unlike God, natural selection is an impersonal,
indifferent “designer.”

It’s truly hard to exaggerate the staggering amount of suffering endured by
sentient creatures over the generations of evolutionary history, most of which
were non-rational, non-moral agents. This is more than just a little
surprising on the hypothesis that an omnipotent, perfectly loving and moral
being is responsible for the natural world.

**(6)** _Divine silence during tragedies._ Say you were a good parent, and you
had a child who needed to visit the doctor and undergo medical treatment. This
treatment wasn’t going to be pleasant, but of course, there’s a good reason
for it. There’s a moral rationale behind the surface-level unpleasantness.
This is essentially what many theists believe about apparent tragedies. There
is some greater moral purpose, some justifying reason that explains why God is
allowing it to happen. We may not know what that moral rationale is, in our
human ignorance – rest assured, there’s a reason. But a good father would be
there for his child in the medical scenario. He would _try_ to explain that
there is a purpose, and what that purpose was, and regardless, he would try to
be a comforting presence. The fact that many victims of tragedies don’t feel
God’s comforting presence is more likely on naturalism than theism.

It needs to be emphasized that this is not like other disagreements. We
disagree over all sorts of issues about how the world works, but typically
there is no omniscient person who is trying to communicate to us the right
answer. On the other hand, God is a personal being who _is_ trying to
communicate the right answers to soteriological questions – and yet he’s
evidently failing to do so. Despite the best efforts of an omnipotent being
who has our best interests at heart, we’re beset with discord on an issue of
infinite significance.

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/), [biblical
confusion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/biblical-confusion/),
[christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [cumulative
case](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/cumulative-case/),
[debate](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debate/), [divine
hiddenness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/divine-hiddenness/),
[divine silence during
tragedies](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/divine-silence-during-
tragedies/), [does god exist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/does-
god-exist/), [doxastic
discord](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/doxastic-discord/),
[draper](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/draper/),
[evolution](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolution/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/), [god doesn't
exist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god-doesnt-exist/),
[nagel](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/nagel/),
[Religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religion/), [religious
confusion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religious-confusion/),
[religious diversity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religious-
diversity/), [soteriological
confusion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/soteriological-
confusion/), [soteriological
discord](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/soteriological-discord/),
[swinburne](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/swinburne/),
[youtube](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/youtube/)

> People who accuse us of putting in too much violence [should see] what we
> leave on the cutting-room floor.
>
> David Attenborough

> The problem of teleological evil differs from the problem of dysteleology in
> that while the latter appeals to poor design as evidence against a supremely
> intelligent designer, the former appeals to good design (in particular,
> design that’s well-suited for causing suffering) as evidence against a
> supremely benevolent designer. To put it crudely, the problem of
> dysteleology is the problem of stupid design; the problem of teleological
> evil is the problem of malevolent design.
>
> Felipe Leon

The North American short-tailed shrew secretes venom from salivary glands in
its lower jaw to paralyze prey. The point of the paralysis is not to kill the
prey, but to keep it alive for an extended period of time to allow for
prolonged feeding. The shrew can infect its prey and then graze on it for days
until it eventually succumbs to its injuries. The North American short-tailed
shrew is not guilty of wrongdoing. It’s not a moral agent. Neither are
parasitic worms or flesh-eating bacteria. They just have the physical and
psychological attributes they have in the biological order in which they find
themselves, where creatures are pitted against one another in a vicious fight
to the death that has lasted for eons and will continue for eons.

I’d also like to briefly draw attention to something a bit more intangible:
Evolution seems to make for a more comfortable fit with naturalism than it
does with theism. Why else would the majority of believers continue to reject
theistic evolution? Why else would intelligent design and special creation
enduringly claim the lion’s share of Christian believers, even many
generations after the discovery of evolution by natural selection? Because
evolution is an insult to human vanity and doesn’t fit neatly with the
flattering Christian image of ourselves.

So, what should we make of this designer, whoever or whatever it is?
Indifference and amorality seem to be safe inferences: Whoever or whatever is
responsible for the general shape of the biological order is probably
indifferent and amoral. What Hume called “the strange mixture of good and ill
which appears in life” is easily accounted for, on that view. Those who
believe the designer is benevolent and perfectly loving _could_ offer _some_
kind of explanation of the mixture of good and ill, just as those who might
believe in a malevolent designer could offer some kind of explanation of the
mixture of good and ill. But indifference and amorality would make for an
easier fit.

  1. Pingback: [CA100 A Catholic and an Atheist Debate God | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/07/01/ca100-a-catholic-and-an-atheist-debate-god/)

This kind of soteriological confusion is a matter of course on naturalism. On
naturalism, religion is a natural phenomenon, and your religious beliefs are
in large part determined by your geography, your familial and peer groups, and
your immediate cultural surroundings.

Predation in the wild is the most obvious example. Predators with sharp teeth
and claws tear the flesh off their prey and snap their bones, and often start
feeding on them while they’re still alive. The natural order has been designed
such that animals must savagely kill and devour each other in order to
survive.

I frankly find this impossible to believe. Nearly every attempted explanation
devolves into incoherence. To make matters worse, untold millions of human
beings, some of them children, have been the victims of psychological
terrorism that arises out of this soteriological fog. Naturalists, of course,
have no difficulty explaining this kind of discord. It would be very
surprising if every religion somehow landed on the same answer about
salvation. Actually, it would be evidence for theism if all the world’s
religions and denominations converged where it really mattered –
soteriological harmony would be good evidence for theism. This is not the
world we see.

In response to the existence of tragedies, theists will often invoke an
unknown purpose or unknown moral reasons, but this doesn’t affect the point.
Shouldn’t God be comforting the victims of tragedies? Isn’t that what a good
father would do? Some feel his comforting presence in the midst of tragedies,
but many do not. This fact is less surprising on naturalism than it is on
theism.

Those who are theists in the audience may have been thinking while I was
presenting my case, “Well, this isn’t a problem for me, because I can explain
divine hiddenness, evolution, animal suffering, and so forth.” I don’t dispute
that you could explain those things! But if you think that undermines my case,
then you’ve misunderstood my case. Merely being able to explain the data and
show that it’s not logically incompatible with your view is a low bar. We want
good explanatory models that predict our observations, in which what we
observe falls out of the model. We don’t want to have to endlessly jump
through hoops simply to account for ordinary observations like the ones I’ve
listed this evening. There’s nothing one can point to and truthfully say, “A
god is absolutely _necessary_ to explain that.” Likewise, there’s no suffering
so appallingly pointless that a believer couldn’t conjure up an explanation
for why an all-good, all-powerful god would continue to behave in a way
indistinguishable from non-existence. Same goes for divine hiddenness,
confusion around salvation, and so on. I think our task is to construct
competing models that explain the evidence, then compare the theistic and non-
theistic models and ask which provides a better explanation of the world, all
things considered. We take a look at the facts of our world – soteriological
confusion, eons of animal suffering, divine hiddenness, teleological evil –
and ask, “Would these facts _be_ facts in a world for which an unsurpassably
great, perfectly loving being is responsible?”

Think about God’s obscurity. If naturalism is true, there is no great mystery
here. God seems hidden because God doesn’t exist. So of course God’s existence
is not apparent, even to many who are open to a relationship with God and who
even desire to be in relationship with God. Comparatively, theists have less
reason to expect our observations, since, if God exists, it’s not a given that
his existence would be obscured from human beings with whom he desires a
relationship. Genuine divine appearance is _incompatible_ with naturalism, but
not theism. So, however likely we are to observe hiddenness in a theistic
world, the odds are not as high as they are in a naturalistic world. While
theists have a somewhat difficult time puzzling over God’s hiddenness,
naturalists have no hoops to jump through. We have a very straightforward
explanation of divine hiddenness.

Naturalists tend to believe that evolution by natural selection is primarily
responsible for the general shape of the biological order. Natural selection
is indifferent and amoral. Why wouldn’t purely natural processes occasionally
generate structures aimed at producing suffering for non-moral agents? There’s
nothing for the naturalist to explain here. We’re not the ones who are
committed to saying that there’s some kind of moral rationale behind the
degree, kind, and distribution of suffering in our world. This kind of natural
evil, more so than ordinary natural evil or moral evil, almost seems like a
straightforward disconfirmation of the idea that a perfectly loving and good
being is ultimately responsible for the design of the biological order. I’m
not making that strong of a claim this evening – only that teleological evil
in nature – in other words, malevolent design – is strong evidence against the
hypothesis that nature was designed, directly or indirectly, by an
unsurpassably great being of perfect love and goodness.

**(3)** _Evolution_. Life is the product of evolutionary processes, not
special creation or intelligent design. On naturalism, there is virtually no
other serious contender explaining how humans came about other than evolution
by natural processes. It’s the only game in town for naturalism. But on
theism, God has options – evolution isn’t beforehand a sure bet. God could’ve
used evolution to create life, and some theists believe he did. But he also
could’ve used other methods – methods which are all but impossible on
naturalism. So the fact that humans and all life came about through evolution
is not surprising on naturalism. There is not really any plausible
alternative. For theists, on the other hand, evolution may or may not be true.
In fact – I don’t know if you’ve heard about this – many theists don’t accept
evolution. It just so happens that the option that turns out to be true is the
only one that could have been true on naturalism. In other words, the odds of
evolution are diminished on theism relative to naturalism simply as a matter
of probability. There’s a smaller number of options under naturalism than on
theism.

In summary, then, we’ve seen six respects in which naturalism provides a
better explanation of the world than theism. For all of these reasons I think
that disbelief in God is eminently reasonable. The cumulative weight of the
evidence tips the scale in favor of atheism. God probably does not exist.

In the context of arguments from evil, there’s a distinction made between
moral evil and natural evil (an example of moral evil being the misuse of free
will to hurt someone, and an example of natural evil being an earthquake or
other natural disaster). Teleological evil is a subset of natural evil. But
it’s harder to reconcile than ordinary natural evil.

Vast numbers of organisms are designed such that they cannot survive – they
cannot feed themselves or their children – unless they savagely kill and
devour each other. Predators _could have_ instead been scavengers, or
herbivores, or some other kind of organism that absorbs energy without tearing
sentient creatures limb from limb. A staggering amount of suffering visited
upon confused sentient creatures could have easily been avoided if God
existed.

The North American short-tailed shrew secretes venom from salivary glands in
its lower jaw to paralyze prey. The point of the paralysis is not to kill the
prey, but to keep it alive for an extended period of time to allow for
prolonged feeding. The shrew can infect its prey and then graze on it for days
until it eventually succumbs to its injuries. The North American short-tailed
shrew is not guilty of wrongdoing. It’s not a moral agent. Of course, I’m not
saying predators are evil; neither are parasitic worms or flesh-eating
bacteria. They just have the physical and psychological attributes they have
in the biological order in which they find themselves, where creatures are
pitted against one another in a vicious fight to the death that has lasted for
eons and will continue for eons.

Tagged [animal suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-
suffering/),
[apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[argument from evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-from-
evil/), [arguments from
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments-from-evil/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [darwin](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/darwin/),
[evolution](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolution/),
[evolutionary animal
suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolutionary-animal-
suffering/), [evolutionary
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolutionary-evil/),
[evolutionary
suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolutionary-
suffering/), [felipe leon](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/felipe-
leon/), [god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/),
[Ichneumonidae](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ichneumonidae/),
[malevolent design](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/malevolent-
design/), [predation](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/predation/),
[problem of evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/problem-of-
evil/), [problem of teleological
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/problem-of-teleological-
evil/), [quentin smith](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/quentin-
smith/), [teleological argument from
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/teleological-argument-from-
evil/), [teleological
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/teleological-evil/)

Predation is the clearest example. Predators with sharp teeth and claws tear
the flesh off their prey and snap their bones, and often start feeding on them
while they’re still alive. The natural order has been designed such that
animals must savagely kill and devour each other in order to survive.

Naturalists tend to believe that evolution by natural selection is primarily
responsible for the biological order. Natural selection is indifferent and
amoral. Why wouldn’t purely natural processes occasionally generate structures
aimed at producing suffering for non-moral agents? There’s nothing for the
naturalist to explain here. We’re not the ones who are committed to saying
that there’s some kind of moral rationale behind the degree, kind, and
distribution of suffering in our world. But this kind of natural evil, more so
than ordinary natural evil or moral evil, almost seems like a straightforward
disconfirmation of the idea that a perfectly loving and good being is
ultimately responsible for the design of the biological order.

Darwin was disturbed by a case of _teleological evil_ : Teleological evil
occurs in virtue of the natural purpose of a thing. It is suffering caused by
organisms acting in accordance with one or more of their natural purposes or
their design plan. This is not the problem of unintelligent design. “To put it
crudely,” [writes Felipe Leon](http://exapologist.blogspot.com/2017/06/the-
problem-of-teleological-evil.html), “the problem of dysteleology is the
problem of stupid design; the problem of teleological evil is the problem of
malevolent design.”

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F06%2F20%2Fteleological-evil%2F&signup_flow=account)

> “With respect to the theological view of the question: This is always
> painful to me. I am bewildered. I had no intention to write atheistically,
> but . . . I cannot persuade myself that a beneficent and omnipotent God
> would have designedly created the Ichneumonidae [parasitic wasp] with the
> express intention of their feeding within the living bodies of
> caterpillars.”
>
> Charles Darwin

In the context of arguments from evil, there’s a distinction made between
moral and natural evil. Teleological evil is a subset of natural evil, though
it’s harder to reconcile than ordinary natural evil:

We need not make that strong of a claim. More modestly, we could maintain that
teleological evil in nature – in other words, malevolent design – is strong
evidence against the hypothesis that nature was designed, directly or
indirectly, by an unsurpassably great being of perfect love and goodness.

> “People who accuse us of putting in too much violence [should see] what we
> leave on the cutting-room floor.”
>
> David Attenborough

> “Teleological evil appears to be a much more formidable problem for theism
> than mere moral evil or non-teleological natural evil. Perhaps the most
> obvious reason is that unlike teleological evil, moral and (non-
> teleological) natural evil involve no clear or otherwise natural presumption
> that such evil was intended by God. . . . By contrast, with teleological
> evil, it is part of the very design plan and natural purpose or function of
> an entity that it causes evil. In such cases, it is natural to infer that if
> there is a god, then it is part of the very intention of God to ensure
> horrific suffering…”
>
> Felipe Leon

This has so far been primarily based on Leon’s problem of teleological evil. A
distinct but related argument comes to us from [Quentin Smith in his 1991
article, _An Atheological Argument from Evil Natural
Laws_](https://infidels.org/library/modern/quentin-smith-evil-laws/):

> Not long ago I was sleeping in a cabin in the woods and was awoken in the
> middle of the night by the sounds of a struggle between two animals. Cries
> of terror and extreme agony rent the night, intermingled with the sounds of
> jaws snapping bones and flesh being torn from limbs. One animal was being
> savagely attacked, killed and then devoured by another.
>
> A clearer case of a horrible event in nature, a natural evil, has never been
> presented to me. It seemed to me self-evident that the natural law that
> animals _must savagely kill and devour each other in order to survive_ was
> an evil natural law and that the obtaining of this law was sufficient
> evidence that God did not exist.

It’s one thing to create something that can be misused to cause suffering.
Someone can drown in a bathtub, but it’s not as if the tub has a malevolent
purpose or function. But a predator’s physical and psychological attributes
are aimed at savaging conscious creatures. It’s not an unfortunate byproduct,
or a misuse of some ability, or a perversion of nature. It’s how the system
has been designed to work.

So, what should we make of this designer, whoever or whatever it is?
Typically, naturalists believe that evolution by natural selection accounts
for the general shape of the biological order. Unlike God, natural selection
is an impersonal, indifferent “designer.” Indifference and amorality seem to
be safe inferences in this case. Whoever or whatever is responsible for the
biological order is probably indifferent and amoral. What Hume called “the
strange mixture of good and ill which appears in life” is easily accounted
for, on that view. Those who believe the designer is benevolent and perfectly
loving _could_ offer _some_ kind of explanation of the mixture of good and
ill, just as those who might believe in a malevolent designer could offer some
kind of explanation of the mixture of good and ill. But indifference and
amorality would make for an easier fit.

> The “new mysterianism,” I believe, is misnamed. It should be called “truism”
> — at least, for anyone who accepts the major findings of modern biology,
> which regards humans as part of the organic world. If so, then they will be
> like all other organisms in having a genetic endowment that enables them to
> grow and develop to their mature form. . . . The endowment that yields scope
> also establishes limits.
>
> [Noam Chomsky](https://chomsky.info/201401__/)

> The brain is a product of evolution, and just as animal brains have their
> limitations, we have ours. Our brains can’t hold a hundred numbers in
> memory, can’t visualize seven-dimensional space and perhaps can’t
> intuitively grasp why neural information processing observed from the
> outside should give rise to subjective experience on the inside. This is
> where I place my bet, though I admit that the theory could be demolished
> when an unborn genius—a Darwin or Einstein of consciousness—comes up with a
> flabbergasting new idea that suddenly makes it all clear to us.
>
> [Steven
> Pinker](http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1580394-6,00.html)

In a review of Luke Roelofs’ book on panpsychism, _Combining Minds_ ,
[Schwitzgebel commented](https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/combining-minds-how-to-
think-about-composite-subjectivity/),

No doubt, there are truths that simply cannot be grasped by the human mind.
Given who we are and how we got here, why would we expect anything else? Our
intuitions evolved to help us survive and reproduce as social animals in our
environment. They’re mostly trustworthy within their domains. But that’s just
it – they have domains. Our minds are not _unlimited_ and did not evolve so we
could understand everything. In fact, you might have been selected _against_
had you been walking on the savannah contemplating the nature of the universe
rather than paying attention to the more immediate goings-on in your
environment.

According to Chomsky, there’s a conceptual distinction between problems and
mysteries. There are many problems which fall within our cognitive capacities
which may be difficult, but are solvable. On the other hand, there are
mysteries, which fall beyond the finite domain of our cognitive capacities.
Problems are things we _could_ solve, but mysteries are insoluble –
inexplicable to the minds of human beings, just as general relativity is
inexplicable to the mind of a raccoon. (Mysteries are species-relative: what’s
a mystery to a Martian might not be a mystery to us.)

Many of these theories, he adds, “seem to leave common sense farther behind
the more specific they become,” leading him to the conclusion that “no non-
bizarre general theory of consciousness is available,” and, he suspects, not
even constructable in principle. [He
argues](http://www.faculty.ucr.edu/~eschwitz/SchwitzPapers/CrazyMind-130712.pdf)
that the truth in the metaphysics of mind is bound to be contrary to common
sense; and that we would not feel compelled to believe the right answer if it
was staring us in the face. Something “crazy . . . must be among the core
truths about . . . the metaphysics of mind.”

What are some other reasons one might be a mysterian? I’ve heard it suggested
that there may be a catch-22 at work here — our brains could never evolve to
be sophisticated enough to understand themselves. We can understand simpler
creatures, but we can’t turn our own cognitive capacities inward and gain a
comprehensive understanding. In order to understand our minds as they
currently exist, we’d have to become significantly more advanced minds. And at
that point, we’d still not be able to understand ourselves! That may or may
not bear on the hard problem of consciousness, whether consciousness is
physical or non-physical, and so on. The aim of mysterianism is to establish
that there are some limitations to our inquiry that cannot be overcome by
human minds. For one reason or another, we aren’t in a good position to affirm
theories of consciousness with a high degree of confidence.

Mysterians believe that we will probably never know how conscious experience
and the physical world fit together. Human beings are incapable of resolving
the hard problem of consciousness. In other words, the true explanation of
subjective experience – whatever it is – is not something we could
appreciate.[ As Colin McGinn put
it](https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/books/first/m/mcginn-
flame.html), “Consciousness indubitably exists, and it is connected to the
brain in some intelligible way, but the nature of this connection necessarily
eludes us.” There’s also a weaker form of mysterianism, which we’ll get into a
bit later. (Both are reasonable, in my view, but the more uncompromising
version is the one I find attractive.)

Mysterianism seems a bit defeatist, but it nonetheless may be true. There are
times when our minds bump up against their cognitive ceiling, and explaining
consciousness could be one of those times. We may never get an intuitively
satisfying answer to this question, just like I’ll never have an intuitively
satisfying answer to whether the universe is infinite or finite. To me, both
possibilities seem equally hard to concretely imagine. Maybe I’m asking the
wrong question, or maybe I’m like a golden retriever trying to grasp the
concept of a prime number. Either way, I’m not going to get a really
satisfying answer.

So, if you’ve ever found yourself thinking “These are all terrible options,”
then mysterianism might be for you. But it doesn’t need to be framed
negatively. We could just as easily reframe it positively: everyone makes
really convincing arguments against opposing views. When materialists level
objections to dualism, they’re right! They’re offering good arguments. When
non-physicalists level objections to physicalism, they’re right! They’re
offering good arguments. Rather than thinking “All these options suck,” you
could just as well think that everyone is making cogent points all around.
There are good arguments against materialism, dualism, panpsychism, and so on;
there are really compelling reasons to reject each of these options. Maybe
there are deep, in principle reasons we can’t come up with a satisfying
explanation of consciousness.

> [T]he bond between the mind and the brain is a deep mystery. Moreover, it is
> an ultimate mystery, a mystery that human intelligence will never unravel.
>
> [Colin
> McGinn](https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/books/first/m/mcginn-
> flame.html)

[Eric Schwitzgebel argues
that](http://www.faculty.ucr.edu/~eschwitz/SchwitzPapers/CrazyMind-130712.pdf)
the reason we haven’t made the kind of progress one might have hoped for is
that we have no reliable guide. No matter which side you take, it’s impossible
to avoid doing violence to common sense at _some_ point. Furthermore, science
isn’t as helpful as usual, and abstract reasoning can’t seem to lead to
convergence.

> are empirically equivalent: there is no experiment that can decide between
> them. That’s not really a surprise, as this is not a purely empirical
> question. It’s rather a question of why something that is publicly
> observable (brain activity) always goes together with something that is not
> publicly observable (subjective experience). This isn’t the kind of question
> an experiment can answer, just as questions about the fundamental character
> of ethics can’t be answered experimentally. One option is agnosticism. If we
> can’t decide between these views experimentally, then maybe we should simply
> say that we don’t know which is true.

There’s a sense in which this is clearly wrong. You know what consciousness is
simply by virtue of being a conscious creature. Of course, the inner life of a
subject does not immediately reveal how to _explain_ consciousness, (i.e.
which metaphysical or scientific account of consciousness is correct), but it
does immediately answer the opening question of “What is consciousness?” When
it comes to subjective experience, the having is the knowing: you know what
consciousness is by virtue of undergoing conscious experiences. In fact,
that’s the only way you _could_ know.

Not only do we know what consciousness is, _all we know_ is consciousness.
Everything – _everything_ – comes to us through consciousness. As far as we’re
concerned, there’s _nothing but_ a world of consciousness.

Here’s one final reason one might be attracted to mysterianism. A version of
the view can rest on a foundation of agnosticism. Many theories of
consciousness, as [Philip Goff
explains](https://conscienceandconsciousness.com/2020/10/29/is-it-the-job-of-
science-or-philosophy-to-account-for-consciousness/),

Though, truth be told, I’m not totally convinced we have a genuine mystery on
our hands. That’s why I’m actively exploring panpsychist and dualist accounts
of mind and matter instead of doing something else. But here’s one reason I’m
attracted to mysterianism: (A) we know there are mysteries, and (B) we have
arguably not made a ton of progress on deciding which metaphysical theory of
consciousness, if any, is actually true. If consciousness and its place in
nature is a genuine mystery, then the lack of concrete progress is to be
expected. Mysterianism would cleanly explain why we’ve moved past vitalism,
but haven’t been able to move past the same materialist vs. dualist vs.
panpsychist vs. idealist debates that were taking place centuries ago. So I’m
making what could be considered two distinct arguments here: pessimistic
induction and inference to the best explanation. As for the latter, we can
safely say that mysterianism would predict the gargantuan fray of conflicting
theories that never seem to resolve into a stable consensus. There are
ephemeral trends, but any survey of the history of the metaphysics of
consciousness will reveal an ebb and flow of opinion that never seems to find
equilibrium. This is to be expected on a mysterian view. So, one might
inductively infer from this history that no stable answer will be reached; and
they might add that this failure of significant progress is better predicted
by the mysterian hypothesis.

The “weak mysterian” or “temporary mysterian” position holds out hope that
some future revolution will show how to close the explanatory gap. One who
holds this moderate view says that what may look unbridgeable in principle is
really just an impermanent roadblock. We may not have anything approaching a
satisfying explanation of subjective experience now, but we could in the
future. We should keep trying. This is optimism of a sort, but it shouldn’t be
misinterpreted as validation of any of the existing options, which any
mysterian will regard as inadequate. What we need is a paradigm shift:

In practice, it may be difficult to identify mysteries. We’ll never know for
certain if our “mystery” is a false positive. This, however, does nothing to
undermine the claim that there _are_ mysteries. Nor does it support the
contrary claim that we have limitless, Godlike intellects whose domain of
applicability is the entirety of nature. That, [as Chomsky
argues](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G8G2QUK_1Wg), is a straightforwardly
anti-evolutionary claim.

What is consciousness? This intractable question, it’s often said, is a great
mystery that philosophers and scientists will struggle to decipher for ages to
come.

Of course, this practical demarcation problem doesn’t change the fact that
there _are_ mysteries (as far as we human beings are concerned) and that we
are biological organisms with a certain cognitive and physical structure –
structures which have domains of applicability and inapplicability. After all,
what’s the alternative? That we have infinite, Godlike intellects with
literally no limitations?

One caveat worth noting: even if one accepts Chomsky’s conceptual distinction
between problems and mysteries, given the difficulty of figuring out which
questions are which – problems or mysteries – it may be best to
methodologically pretend there are no mysteries. We could mistake a problem
for a mystery, and fail to pursue what could have been a fruitful line of
inquiry. Talk about insoluble mysteries may discourage exploration that could
be useful in ways we couldn’t have predicted beforehand. If we took the
mysterian attitude in other areas, some things would never have gotten done.
In practice, the question of how to identify mysteries is about as vexing as
the mysteries themselves.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F06%2F10%2Fmysterianism-rational-pessimism-in-the-metaphysics-of-consciousness%2F&signup_flow=account)

> If there’s one thing we know about the metaphysics of consciousness, it is
> that something bizarre must be true. Among the reasons to think so: Every
> well-developed theory of consciousness in the entire history of written
> philosophy on Earth has either been radically bizarre on its face or had
> radically bizarre consequences.

Unlike mysterians, I think there are __ plausible options on the table. I rank
some kind of dual-aspect monism first (e.g. panpsychism, though I think some
consciousness-only monisms can also be squeezed into this category); second,
some version of dualism; and strong mysterianism third. So to be clear, I’m
not defending mysterianism as my first choice. Nonetheless, I think it’s a far
more plausible idea than flat-footed reductive materialism.

It should be noted that for something to rise to the level of mystery, it does
not need to be inexplicable in principle to _all_ hypothetical beings. It
wouldn’t have to be inexplicable even to God, for instance. Whether there are
any mysteries in this superlative sense is an interesting question. But a
belief in the rationality of the universe leads me to think that any apparent
in-principle mysteries are really the product of badly-formed questions or
going beyond our limitations. For our purposes, we need not take a position on
whether there are in-principle mysteries in nature – only whether there are
mysteries as far as human beings are concerned.

The problem is that the question “What is consciousness?” is ambiguous. As
outlined a moment ago, there are at least two senses in which it’s profoundly
mistaken to think that we don’t know what consciousness is. (It’s even a
little strange to pose the question in the first place, since consciousness is
just…this.) But there’s a sense in which it’s not at all unreasonable to say
that the nature of consciousness is mysterious: we don’t know which account of
consciousness is true. Of course, in that case, there are better ways to
present the question. “What is consciousness?” is not a clear formulation of
the question of whether substance dualism, epiphenomenal property dualism,
reductive materialism, Russellian panpsychism, or any of our other
metaphysical theories of consciousness are close to the mark. This is the area
in which pessimism about “the mystery of consciousness” is an eminently
reasonable position to defend. The name for this pessimistic view is
_mysterianism_.

The stronger form of mysterianism – the kind associated with Noam Chomsky, for
instance – is far more pessimistic about gaining anything like a complete
understanding of consciousness, as well as other mysteries that fall beyond
our cognitive purview:

> Now, my own suspicion is that the universe is not only queerer than we
> suppose, but queerer than we can suppose. I have read and heard many
> attempts at a systematic account of it, from materialism and theosophy to
> the Christian system or that of Kant, and I have always felt that they were
> much too simple. I suspect that there are more things in heaven and earth
> than are dreamed of, or can be dreamed of, in any philosophy.

One motivation for mysterianism stems from a dissatisfaction with existing
theories of consciousness, and perhaps glimpsing what seem to be in-principle
reasons that certain problems cannot be resolved. After being left thoroughly
unimpressed with each option in the metaphysics of consciousness, one might
reasonably conclude that the entire enterprise was doomed to begin with. As
explained by Chomsky earlier, our minds have limited domains, and there’s no
great reason to expect “understanding the metaphysics of consciousness” to
fall within our domain of understanding.

Echoes of this can be found in Schwitzgebel’s case discussed earlier, but Goff
is far more optimistic about the possibility of using reason to resolve the
problem and reach an intelligible and satisfying theory of consciousness. I
tentatively share Goff’s optimism, as I’m not ready to give up and embrace the
mystery quite yet. Nevertheless, we should heed the words of biologist J.B.S.
Haldane, who said in 1927,

It seems as if there’s no objective way of settling this debate, and it’s
unclear whether the non-empirical resources we do have at our disposal are
adequate to establish a significant credence in _any_ metaphysical theory of
consciousness. It’s not that Theory A can’t be significantly more probable
than Theory B. Our credence is Theory A can be high _relative to_ some
competitor, but not high in an absolute sense. There’s just not much to work
from. If no publicly-available data can settle the issue, and no philosophical
method seems able to yield any degree of intersubjective agreement, then maybe
we should consider the idea that we are unable to solve the problem, or just
asking bad questions.

Assuming we’re playing the “metaphysics of consciousness” game at all, I think
we have three broad options: (1) unifying mind and matter in some kind of
intelligible and satisfying way (2) separating mind and matter in some kind of
intelligible and satisfying way (3) recognizing that there will never be an
intelligible and satisfying resolution to this problem. I spend the most time
exploring option (1), defending my preferred way of unifying mind and matter
and criticizing the more mainstream ways of doing so. Trailing far behind in
second is option (2), dualism. But what about option (3)? Mysterianism, I
think, has a lot going for it. There certainly are mysteries (as far as humans
are concerned), and accounting for consciousness _may_ be one of those
mysteries. But why think we’ve stumbled on a genuine mystery here? It _could_
be the case, but why think it _is_ the case? Let’s take a brief look at
several different arguments that have been offered.

> Certain fundamental questions about the metaphysics of mind can’t, it seems,
> be settled by science, in anything like its current state, or by abstract
> reasoning. To address these questions we must turn to common sense. If we
> then have good reason to think that common sense, too, is no reliable guide,
> we are unmoored. Without common sense as a constraint, the possibilities
> open up, bizarre and beautiful in their different ways; and once open they
> refuse to shut.

Of course, if you _are_ satisfied with some option, then don’t let me rain on
your parade. I’m only explaining what the motivation for mysterianism might
be. If you find yourself in the state of mind, as I sometimes do, that there
are no good options on the table, then mysterianism begins to seem very
attractive. (I remember when I first started talking about panpsychism, I
described it as “the worst option except for all the other ones,” echoing the
adage about democracy. So this isn’t a change of pace for me.)

Since we’re organisms produced by evolution, we have a cognitive structure
that has a scope and limits, just as our physical structure has a scope and
limits. We can run, but we can’t fly. We can solve some mathematical problems,
but we can’t solve the hard problem or establish a satisfactory theory of
consciousness. Or so the mysterian argues.

Tagged [arguments](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments/),
[chomsky](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/chomsky/), [chomsky
mysterian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/chomsky-mysterian/),
[consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness/),
[debate](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debate/),
[dennett](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/dennett/),
[explained](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/explained/),
[goff](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/goff/),
[haldane](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/haldane/), [hard
problem](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/hard-problem/), [hard
problem of consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/hard-
problem-of-consciousness/),
[iep](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/iep/),
[introduction](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/introduction/),
[mcginn](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mcginn/),
[mysterian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mysterian/),
[mysterianism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mysterianism/), [new
mysterianism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/new-mysterianism/),
[new mysterians](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/new-mysterians/),
[noam chomsky mysterianism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/noam-
chomsky-mysterianism/),
[panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/panpsychism/),
[philosophy of mind](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/philosophy-of-
mind/), [pinker](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/pinker/),
[qualia](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/qualia/),
[roelofs](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/roelofs/),
[schwitzgebel](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/schwitzgebel/),
[sep](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/sep/),
[weird](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/weird/),
[weirdness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/weirdness/)

For now, I’ll keep pursuing my various non-physicalist interests. If those
lead me to the same dead end that physicalism led me to, then I’ll add this to
the list of things Noam Chomsky was right about.

> Every day, it seems, some verifiably intelligent person tells us that we
> don’t know what consciousness is. The nature of consciousness, they say, is
> an awesome mystery. . . . I find this odd because we know exactly what
> consciousness is — where by “consciousness” I mean what most people mean in
> this debate: experience of any kind whatever. It’s the most familiar thing
> there is, whether it’s experience of emotion, pain, understanding what
> someone is saying, seeing, hearing, touching, tasting or feeling. It is in
> fact the only thing in the universe whose ultimate intrinsic nature we can
> claim to know. It is utterly unmysterious.
>
> [Galen Strawson](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/16/opinion/consciousness-
> isnt-a-mystery-its-matter.html)

As I mentioned earlier, I worry about this kind of sentiment. On the one hand,
Haldane and Chomsky are undeniably correct. But the issue of _identifying_
mysteries in practice is what worries me. What if mysterianism is a self-
fulfilling prophecy? What if we’re discouraging people from seeking answers
when there are answers out there to be found?

_“It is certainly true that if you change the parameters of nature, our local
conditions that we observe around us would change by a lot. … I do not grant
that therefore, life could not exist. I will start granting that once someone
tells me the conditions under which life can exist. What is the definition of
life, for example? If it’s just information processing, thinking, something
like that — there’s a huge panoply of possibilities.”_

All this to say that if the current values of the universe were different,
maybe _we_ wouldn’t be here, but that doesn’t mean that some other form of
life couldn’t emerge. After all, when we consider the fundamental laws of our
universe, it’s not at all obvious that humans would eventually emerge. There
is simply nothing about the equations that describe our universe that
immediately suggest that humans will result, so we have no right to look at a
different set of equations and dismiss the possibility of another kind of life
in that hypothetical universe.

Obviously, I’m a little biased, but I think Carroll mopped the floor with his
opponent. In my view, the fact that WLC still parades around using the same
arguments that Carroll destroyed here demonstrates Craig’s disregard for
scientific accuracy. He knows his audience doesn’t know any better, so he
continues trotting out the same flawed arguments in his relentless quest for
fame.

If you rigidly and arbitrarily define ‘life’ as strictly _human_ life, then we
indeed have a fine-tuning problem. However, if you define life more broadly —
in terms of consciousness, information processing, etc. — there is not much
reason to think we have a fine tuning problem at all. Let’s say those finely
tuned parameters of nature were different: why couldn’t some other form of
conscious being emerge from that different universe? As Sean Carroll puts it,

_“The only framework in which you can honestly say that the physical
parameters of the universe must take on certain values in order for life to
exist is naturalism.”_

If you’re a theist, you are probably not a materialist. You probably believe
that human beings possess an animating soul, which is what we _really_ are. If
you’re a naturalist like me, you believe that consciousness is purely
information processing performed by the physical arrangement of atoms in the
brain. There is no extra, immaterial ’stuff’ pushing around chemicals in the
brain. This being clarified, why on earth does god need to fine tune anything
physical for life to exist? I thought consciousness was non-physical? If I
have an immaterial soul, it should be able to exist regardless of the
properties of the physical, material world.

This is to say nothing of our own bodies, where our appendices burst and our
teeth can kill us. We reach sexual maturity before reaching cognitive
maturity, we eat and breathe with the same hole, and our eyes, spines, and
joints go bad more often than not. I’m not sure why _I_ can think of
improvements for our environment and bodies that an omniscient and omnipotent
god apparently failed to imagine.

According to theism, conscious life is partly non-physical. So why do the
physical, material parameters of nature need to hold certain values for our
non-physical, immaterial souls to exist?

As an afterthought, I would like to add that our “finely-tuned” universe is
almost entirely hostile to life. Is this really the best god could do? Give us
a fragile planet with extremely limited resources, teeming with organisms
trying to kill us (including organisms _invisible_ to us), with vast swaths of
the land uninhabitable to humans much of the time? Actually, the majority of
the planet is not ideal for humans. And even where it is hospitable, we’re
still plagued by earthquakes, disease, and other forms of natural evil. We
have to build shelters _from_ our finely tuned environment!

As Christopher Hitchens was fond of pointing out, even if I accept the Fine
Tuning Argument from start to finish, it doesn’t get you to Christianity, and
certainly not your favorite version of it. It doesn’t even get you to theism,
let alone one particular version. Even if you find yourself convinced by the
apologist’s dubious probability calculations, you cannot logically proceed
past deism. This point is not hypothetical — _ISIS_ uses the Fine Tuning
Argument. I read an article in the Islamic State’s very own publication,
formerly known as _Dabiq_ , where they trot out, word for word, the
teleological reasoning that I’m used to hearing from Christian apologists.

Often I hear from nonbelievers that the Fine Tuning Argument is the best
argument the religious have to offer. So in the spirit of attacking theism at
its best, here are a few quick reasons why I don’t accept the Fine Tuning
Argument presented by the religious.

If you’ve never seen the debate in which Sean Carroll debunks the standard
Christian apologetics based on pseudophysics, including the Fine Tuning
Argument, do yourself a huge favor:
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wqKObSeim2w](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wqKObSeim2w)

Most of this is based on the work of physicist Sean Carroll, author of one of
my favorite books of all time, _The Big Picture: On the Origins of Life,
Meaning, and the Universe Itself_. His work is fantastic and I highly
recommend you check out his books and debates on YouTube linked below.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2017%2F08%2F05%2Fthe-fine-tuning-argument%2F&signup_flow=account)

In summary, then, we’ve seen four respects in which theism provides a better
explanation of the world than naturalism. If my opponent is to persuade us
otherwise, he must first tear down all of the reasons that I have presented
and then in their place erect a case of his own to show the opposite. Unless
and until he does that, I think we should readily concede that belief in God
is reasonable.

There are many arguments from consciousness, but this one is incredibly
simple. Here’s the observation: Consciousness exists. (Or, alternatively:
There is at least one conscious agent.) Now, it’s a trivial point that an
observation is evidence favoring one hypothesis over another if one of our two
hypotheses assigns a bigger probability to that observation than the other.
Since God is a conscious being, theism entails the existence of consciousness:
the probability assigned to “Consciousness exists” is 1. Atheism plainly does
not entail that consciousness exists (neither does naturalism or the
hypothesis of indifference). Thus, theism assigns a higher probability to the
existence of consciousness than its rivals, from which it follows that our
observation – “Consciousness exists” – is evidence favoring theism over
naturalism.

Thank you for having me. I count it a privilege to be exercising my emotional
and intellectual empathy with theists. I think that’s a great value of these
devil’s advocate debates. I hope Kyle and I, as well as everyone watching, can
walk away with a deeper understanding of theism and atheism.

As it turns out, the majority of philosophers _of religion_ are theists. So
the subgroup of philosophers with the most plausible claim to relevant
expertise _are_ mostly theists. Perhaps selection pressure could explain why
most philosophers of religion are theists – atheists are probably less
inclined to study something they don’t think is real in the first place. While
this is plausible, it doesn’t bear much on the argument. My argument is not an
appeal to the consensus of experts. It’s an appeal to widespread acceptance
among all human beings, past and present.

_I recently participated in a “devil’s advocate” debate on God’s existence. I
defended theism, and my opponent, Christian Idealism, defended naturalism.
Below is the transcript of my expanded opening statement. There were a few
paragraphs which were saved for the rebuttal segment, but they’ve been
included here._

What about the consensus of experts? If common sense led most people to
Conclusion A, but those with relevant expertise, upon intense study, came to
Conclusion B, that fact would provide a defeater for the support initially
offered by widespread acceptance. So, who are the epistemic authorities here?

Many atheists and skeptics would be quick to reply that this argument commits
a blatant “appeal to popularity” fallacy. “Just because a belief is widely
accepted doesn’t necessarily mean it’s true!” When stated that way, it’s
obviously correct: popularity isn’t conclusive proof for a proposition. (I
don’t know if anyone has ever said that it is.) What I’m claiming is that
widespread acceptance provides inductive support for a proposition. Why?
Because our cognitive faculties are generally truth-tracking, and because most
of our beliefs are true. To quote epistemologist Michael Huemer,

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[argument from
consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-from-
consciousness/), [arguments for
god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments-for-god/),
[arguments for theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments-
for-theism/), [atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[common consent argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/common-
consent-argument/),
[consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [devil's advocate debate
god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/devils-advocate-debate-god/),
[devil's advocate debate
theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/devils-advocate-debate-
theism/), [fine tuning](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fine-
tuning/), [god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/),
[psychophysical](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/psychophysical/),
[psychophysical
harmony](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/psychophysical-harmony/),
[Religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religion/), [religious
experience](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religious-experience/),
[theist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/theist/), [tiddy
smith](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/tiddy-smith/), [widespread
theistic belief](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/widespread-
theistic-belief/)

Today, we are interested in discussing some of the arguments that make belief
in God reasonable or unreasonable. In my opening, I am going to present four
arguments which I think make it reasonable to believe that God exists.

> “[Ad populum] is the ‘fallacy’ of believing something because most people
> believe it. But what exactly is supposed to be wrong with that? . . . Maybe
> the idea is that most people believing p is _irrelevant_ to whether p is
> true. I.e., if most people believe it, that doesn’t mean it is more likely
> to be correct. Problem: This is obviously wrong. If most people believe
> something, that obviously _does_ make it more likely to be correct than if
> most people don’t believe it. If most of our beliefs weren’t true, the human
> species would die out pretty much immediately. Sometimes, people elaborate
> on this ‘fallacy’ by citing examples of beliefs that were once widely held
> but were false – e.g., that the sun orbits the Earth. So let me now just
> mention a few typical examples of beliefs that are widely held: Dogs exist.
> It’s generally lighter in the daytime than at night. The sky is blue, not
> red, green, or yellow. There are more than three human beings in existence.
> Human beings commonly have beliefs and desires. Putting your hand in a fire
> hurts. Six is more than two. The Earth has existed for more than five
> minutes. When you drop rocks near the surface of the Earth, they generally
> fall. . . . I’m sure you can extend that list for a long time. Now, which
> would you say there are more of: Widely-held beliefs that are true, or ones
> that are false?”

  3. Pingback: [CA97 Widespread Theistic Belief & Religious Disagreement (Devil’s Advocate pt. 2) | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/06/12/ca97-widespread-theistic-belief-religious-disagreement-devils-advocate-pt-2/)

As I mentioned, about nineteen out of twenty people believe in God. Now,
imagine we designed a computer program that could solve advanced problems of
some nature or another. It was experimental technology and it wasn’t perfect,
but it produced the right answer more often than not – far greater than
chance. (I.e., it was generally truth-tracking in the appropriate domain.) Say
we asked twenty computers the same question, and nineteen of them produced the
same answer. Clearly, this would be strong evidence in favor of one answer
over the other. It’s not _impossible_ that the one is right and the nineteen
are wrong, but the odds are against it.

Can neuroscience explain religious experiences? Skeptics will sometimes appeal
to neural correlates of religious experiences, pointing out, with varying
degrees of specificity, that the brain is active while these religious
experiences take place. What seems implicit here is the following line of
reasoning: because these experiences were chemically mediated, they can’t be
trusted. That’s obviously wrong, because all of your experiences are
chemically mediated. Yes, there are neural correlates to religious experience.
But presenting the neural correlates of a perceived tree does not imply the
tree is a hallucination. All of your thoughts, everything that you think,
every line of reasoning that you follow, all sense data that come in – all of
your experiences are neurologically mediated, in _some_ sense. And certainly
some of those experiences have epistemic credibility! The argument that
neurologically mediated states of consciousness cannot be truth-tracking is
not just incorrect – it’s self-defeating. Your thought that providing the
neural basis of religious experience would debunk those experiences is also
chemically mediated and can also be described neurologically! So appeals to
neuroscience of this sort are nonsensical and self-defeating.

In _The Varieties of Religious Experience,_ William James exposes an epistemic
double standard held among many skeptics:

On whether we are naturally disposed to believe in God, or whether we’re
indoctrinated or otherwise taught to believe in God, I would point to the
“Cognition, Religion and Theology Project” led by Dr. Justin Barrett, from the
Centre for Anthropology and Mind at Oxford University: “A three-year
international research project, directed by two academics at the University of
Oxford, finds that humans have natural tendencies to believe in gods and an
afterlife.” The roughly two million dollar project “involved 57 researchers
who conducted over 40 separate studies in 20 countries representing a diverse
range of cultures. The studies (both analytical and empirical) conclude that
humans are predisposed to believe in gods and an afterlife, and that both
theology and atheism are reasoned responses to what is a basic impulse of the
human mind. The researchers point out that the project was not setting out to
prove the existence of god or otherwise, but sought to find out whether
concepts such as gods and an afterlife appear to be entirely taught or basic
expressions of human nature.” There may be religious disagreement about
precisely what’s there, but something Godlike is a point of agreement. (Given
a plausible soteriological scheme, I think the evidential weight of religious
diversity, discord, confusion, disagreement, etc. is seriously diminished.)

Those who experience God are rational in believing in him. In the ordinary
experiential states of seeing, feeling, hearing, etc. we naturally form
beliefs about the external world. These beliefs are appropriately grounded in
experience. If it seems to you that you’re seeing an object, or for that
matter a person, then in the absence of any defeaters, you have some
justification for believing that there really is an object, person, etc. –
it’s entirely rational for you to believe so.

If human cognitive faculties, which are generally truth-tracking,
overwhelmingly produce the same conclusion, that fact does provide defeasible
evidential support for that conclusion.

The multiverse, anthropic principle, observer selection effect, etc. could not
explain psychophysical harmony, since observers could find themselves in
disharmonious universes. While it’s true that observers could not find
themselves in non-life-permitting universes, observers could find themselves
in disharmonious universes. Needless to say, you would not want to be one of
these unlucky observers. And that’s a key point for the argument: we are
_fortunate_ to not be one of these observers. Not _just_ because disharmony
would be bad for conscious creatures, but because the number of
disharmoniously tuned universes is vastly greater than the number of
harmonious universes.

> “There are many conditions that predispose towards ‘mystical’ experience: .
> . . ingestion of ‘mind-altering’ drugs – mescaline, psilocybin; bodily
> insult – starvation, mortification, extreme exercise, extreme sexual
> activity, near-death experience; ‘rhythmical’ activities – meditation,
> prayer, trance, music, dance, chant; and so forth. These conditions are not
> noted for their cognitive reliability in other domains . . . [They] are not
> positively correlated with performance on standard reasoning and inference
> tasks. Indeed, [they] are all very strongly negatively correlated with
> performance on standard reasoning and inference tasks.”

Conscious beings did not have to have the exact nature that we have. Since God
has reason to design the psychophysical laws in order to bring about the
values realized by consciousness and by psychophysical harmony, theism makes
harmony much more likely than it would otherwise be. Certainly more likely
than it would be on a hypothesis of indifference, wherein fundamental reality
has no tendency to realize value or disvalue.

  2. Pingback: [CA96 Debunking Myself on God (pt. 1) | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/06/09/ca96-debunking-myself-on-god-pt-1/)

The argument from psychophysical harmony can be considered a fine-tuning
argument focused on consciousness. In recent years, philosophers of mind have
been puzzled to notice strikingly harmonious relations between conscious
states and physical states, and conscious states with one another. Our nature
as conscious beings is partially or wholly dependent on laws of nature – laws
which conceivably could have varied in dramatic ways. So, our nature as
conscious beings conceivably could have been dramatically different in
innumerable disharmonious ways. (For example, we can imagine terrible
pain/pleasure inversion scenarios, or more hedonically neutral scenarios that
we are nonetheless fortunate to have avoided.) What’s striking is that a given
functional role has been correlated with a subjective experience that
rationalizes, justifies, or otherwise makes sense of that functional role.
Presumably, the causal skeleton of the world could have remained in place,
thus making no difference to natural selection, while altering the
psychophysical laws such that the physical, functional states correlated with
phenomenal states that did not rationalize, justify, or otherwise make sense
of that behavior. In other words, the external, physical world could have
remained fixed while the internal, phenomenal world could have been chaotic or
even hellish as a consequence of the altered, non-finely tuned psychophysical
laws.

Though we’ve touched on them already, let’s address two common objections to
psychophysical harmony:

About nineteen out of twenty people believe in God. If nineteen out of twenty
people in the room see something, and you don’t, what makes you think it’s
everyone else who’s missing something? We can surely admit that our faculties
are fallible but generally trustworthy. It should give the atheist pause when
they realize that they’re in the minority here. Humility should be the
watchword. And yet, “humility” is not the word that springs to mind after even
a few minutes with the atheist and skeptic community online. If God is a
delusion, why isn’t it like other delusions? Why isn’t theism like flat earth?
Flat earth doesn’t have the same widespread acceptance or intellectual
pedigree as theism.

> “Mystical states, when well developed, usually are, and have the right to
> be, absolutely authoritative over the individuals to whom they come. . . .
> Our own more ‘rational’ beliefs are based on evidence exactly similar in
> nature to that which mystics quote for theirs. Our senses, namely, have
> assured us of certain states of fact; but mystical experiences are as direct
> perceptions of fact for those who have them as any sensations ever were for
> us. The records show that even though the five senses be in abeyance in
> them, they are absolutely sensational in their epistemological quality . . .
> Yet, I repeat once more, the existence of mystical states absolutely
> overthrows the pretension of non-mystical states to be the sole and ultimate
> dictators of what we may believe. . . . It is the rationalistic critic
> rather who plays the part of denier in the controversy, and his denials have
> no strength, for there never can be a state of facts to which new meaning
> may not truthfully be added, provided the mind ascend to a more enveloping
> point of view. It must always remain an open question whether mystical
> states may not possibly be such superior points of view, windows through
> which the mind looks out upon a more extensive and inclusive world. The
> difference of the views seen from the different mystical windows need not
> prevent us from entertaining this supposition. The wider world would in that
> case prove to have a mixed constitution like that of this world, that is
> all.”

> “Various instances of psychophysical harmony have been emphasized in recent
> work by Adam Pautz (2020), David Chalmers (2018), Philip Goff (2018), Hedda
> Hassel Mørch (2017, 2020), Harold Langsam (2011), Noa Latham (2000), and
> Bradford Saad (2019).”
>
> Dustin Crummett & Brian Cutter

One might point out that there’s an inverse correlation between education and
religiosity. But the question here is one of _relevant_ expertise. I don’t
particularly care what climate scientists think about philosophy of mind or
what economists think about photography. If someone has some nondescript
degree, why would that make them an epistemic authority on God?

Let’s move away from religious experience to the more mundane area of memory.
Imagine you are accused of a crime on the basis of very convincing evidence,
but you know that you didn’t do it on the basis of your memory. For you, the
immediate evidence of your memory is not defeated by the public evidence
against you. Of course, this won’t do much to convince others who don’t have
access to your mnemonic (memory) seemings. Even though the publicly available
evidence is the same for everyone, they may be rational in believing you did
it, and you’re rational in believing you didn’t do it. You occupy different
positions on the grand epistemic landscape. Contrary evidence may be strong
enough to persuade you that your experiences are deceiving you, but that would
require overwhelming contrary evidence.

The problem with Oppy’s response here is that the claim has not, nor has it
ever been, that religious experiences improve your performance on “standard
reasoning and inference tasks.” The claim is that those who experience these
unusual states of consciousness are seeing things that we don’t ordinarily
see, and appreciating truths that ordinarily escape us. They don’t improve
your SAT score. Our senses and immediate experiences provide a path to truth –
one which is quite different from logical inference. Our sense data and
experiences put us in touch with reality as well, and it’s possible that these
non-ordinary states of consciousness are causing us to see and understand in a
similar way.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F05%2F29%2Fdoes-god-exist-transcript-of-opening-statement%2F&signup_flow=account)

> “The present inability of science to explain consciousness plays no role
> whatsoever in the argument. What’s doing the work in the argument is the
> fact that theism . . . entails that consciousness exists, whereas naturalism
> has no such entailment.”

This argument was developed by an atheist philosopher of religion, Jeff
Lowder. In his article, “An F-Inductive Argument from Consciousness for
Theism, Revisited” Lowder writes

It’s perhaps worth noting that most of the philosophers who have brought this
problem of harmony to the fore are not theists. They have no hidden theistic
agenda. In fact, some of them are outspoken atheists. Interestingly, some of
these secular philosophers have noted that a benevolent God could solve this
problem, since God would have the power to alter the natural laws and would
have a motivation to design laws that brought about valuable things, such as
consciousness and psychophysical harmony. Theism has a unique advantage over
atheism in its ability to predict valuable states of affairs. An indifferent
universe doesn’t care if it brings about valuable or disvaluable things!

Maybe we won the cosmic lottery, but theism can offer a better explanation
than that.

First, what do I mean by God? I’ll be defending bare philosophical theism, but
nonetheless something approximating the traditional view of God worshiped by
many Christians, Muslims, Jews, and others: a necessary, perfectly loving,
morally perfect, conscious, personal being (person in the sense that he’s
someone with whom we interact) of infinite power at the foundation of reality.
(Due to time constraints, we won’t be able to explore different models of God.
Suffice to say we could make some alterations to these divine attributes while
remaining in the ballpark of perfect being theism.)

Even though atheists can provide a good case for their position, unless it
meets a very high bar, it won’t do much to persuade those who have had the
experience of God. Nor should it.

Belief in God was produced by generally truck-tracking human faculties far
more often than it wasn’t. Furthermore, its likelihood is raised as a simple
matter of probability, since most of the beliefs that are held by most people
are true.

> Phenomenal Conservatism: If it seems to S that P, then, in the absence of
> defeaters, S thereby has at least some justification for believing that P
> (Huemer 2007).

By “evidence,” I mean that which makes a hypothesis more probable than it
otherwise would have been. The arguments I’ll offer take the following general
form: an observation strongly favors theism over atheism if theism assigns to
that observation a probability that is bigger than the probability that
atheism assigns to that observation. I.e., Pr(O|Theism) > Pr(O|Atheism). Of
course, atheists can explain the data to which I’ve appealed. Nevertheless,
theism assigns a higher probability to these observations than atheism. The
fact that we can all explain the data if we put our minds to it doesn’t change
the basic judgment that certain observations are more likely on theism than on
atheism.

With that in mind, I’m going to offer four lines of evidence that make theism
more likely than it otherwise would have been:

Can our hyperactive agency detection device (HADD) explain religious
experiences? Allow me to concede that HADD can explain _some_ religious
experiences. However, it is implausible to maintain that _all_ religious
experiences can be explained via HADD, since it’s only a subset of religious
experiences that don’t go beyond mere agency detection. Furthermore, our
agency detection doesn’t _always_ misfire. It’s accurate more often than not.
Perhaps it’s misfiring when we experience God, but perhaps it’s not: it could
be working just as it’s designed to work.

> “As the human intellect, though weak, is not essentially perverted, there is
> a certain presumption of the truth of any opinion held by many human minds,
> requiring to be rebutted by assigning some other real or possible cause for
> its prevalence.”
>
> J.S. Mill

Natural selection has no influence over laws of nature, and psychophysical
laws are a subset of natural laws. Just as natural selection can’t affect laws
of gravity, it can’t affect psychophysical laws. This isn’t to undermine
evolutionary explanations in biology – only to say that laws of nature are
ontologically prior, as it were, to natural selection. This argument is about
fortunately tuned natural laws, which conceivably could have been quite
different. A hypothesis of indifference leaves us completely in the dark as to
what explains our good fortune. Whereas, the hypothesis that there’s a
perfectly loving, omnipotent designer of nature makes quick work of this
problem.

One might point out that there’s an inverse correlation between education _in
philosophy_ and religiosity. The majority of philosophers do not believe in
God. But again, the question is one of _relevant_ expertise. Why should we
place any particular emphasis on what philosophers of language think about
God? Furthermore, as Quentin Smith noted in his article The Metaphilosophy of
Naturalism, “the great majority of naturalist philosophers have an unjustified
belief that naturalism is true and an unjustified belief that theism (or
supernaturalism) is false.” Smith, a leading atheist philosopher himself,
believed that his academic peers were only “accidentally” right.

The concept of God is deeply embedded in the human psyche. Human faculties
overwhelmingly tend to produce belief in something Godlike, just as they
overwhelmingly tend to produce a belief in the external world, other minds,
induction, and a laundry list of true beliefs so mundane we hardly notice
them. This is the case for the vast majority of the world’s population now and
throughout history.

Here’s a different objection to arguments from religious experience, offered
by Graham Oppy (2013).

To elaborate, let me borrow an illustration from Paul Draper. Say we have two
jars of jelly beans. One is filled with mostly red beans and a small number of
blue beans, and the other is filled with mostly blue beans and a small number
of red beans. Both jars also contain an equal number of yellow beans. Someone
takes a handful of beans from one of the jars. We don’t know which. We have
several red beans, a few blue beans, and a few yellow beans. So the evidence
in this case is _compatible_ with the beans coming from either jar, but it’s
surprising on the assumption that they came out of the second jar and
unsurprising on the assumption that they came out of the first. So how many
red beans, yellow beans, and blue beans have we drawn?

Of the beliefs that are held by most people, most of them are true. They’re
just so mundane that we typically don’t notice them. So the fact that most
people throughout history and in the present believe in God _does_ make God’s
existence more probable than it otherwise would have been. For one, it was
produced by generally truck-tracking faculties far more often than it wasn’t;
and second, its likelihood is raised as a simple matter of probability, since
most of the beliefs that are held by most people are true.

I think the arguments for and against God are cumulative. This is the case for
any scientific or historical theory. We don’t produce just one piece of
evidence for our hypothesis; we produce many pieces of evidence which together
make the hypothesis probable. I’m going to offer four lines of evidence that
we are more likely to observe in a theistic world than an atheistic world.

  1. Pingback: [Does God Exist? Devil’s Advocate Debate | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/06/01/does-god-exist-devils-advocate-debate/)

I hope I won’t try your patience here, and absolutely no worries if you prefer
to move on. But how would you define “qualitative” in this context? To me,
that’s one of those synonyms I expressed concern about above. I’ll give you my
(reductive) answer. I think they’re categorizing conclusions, along with the
blizzard of associated dispositions and predictions that fire when a stimulus
comes in. I’m guessing you don’t think that covers it. But my question is,
what’s missing?

Having said that, how exactly would I define qualia if I were speaking to a
layperson? Typically, I define phenomenal consciousness as just being that
virtual model of the world which is constructed in or represented by our
brains. We all have a rich construction of how the world works, and this
richness or feeling-ness constitutes our conscious life. The problem of
physicalism just comes in because it seems like I could give a full physical
and/or functional description of my brain system, without ever describing
anything in my virtual model.

I wasn’t familiar with Schwitzgebel’s take on phenomenality, but I just read
through his paper on the subject and was unimpressed. It seems to me he’s
basically stripped everything away from ‘phenomenality’ that defines the
concept (“I swear it’s a car, but it doesn’t have a power supply, wheels, or
steering etc…). So, he hasn’t avoided Frankish’s horn at all, which he readily
concedes in fact. He just adds a ‘wonderfulness’ criterion, but all that does
it make it more epistemically difficult to achieve reduction to the horn 2
position (reduction is not ‘obvious’), but it doesn’t actually avoid the logic
of Frankish’s argument.

                  1. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fa6212456ab617d2fc0898136bec5d0d?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **[SelfAwarePatterns](http://selfawarepatterns.com)** says:

For a related argument against epiphenomenalism, one that greatly expands on
this basic idea, check out [my interview with Dustin Crummett on
psychophysical harmony.](https://youtu.be/auahudU1C08)

It’s an illusion in the sense of not being what it seems, but not in the sense
of not existing. But crucially, the “illusion” has evolutionary adaptive
benefits, so I think calling it an “illusion” implies a mistake of some kind,
and that feels misleading to me. (I might change my mind about this in the
future, but that’s my current take.)

In _The Principles of Psychology_ , William James offered an evolutionary
argument against epiphenomenalism:

As I noted above, I think the right way to describe it is the appearance is
real, but the objective reality is far from obvious from the appearance. Some
people refer to that as illusionism too, but it’s a weaker form.

The impressive, systematic correlations between adaptive behavior and pleasure
(and maladaptive behavior and displeasure) on the epiphenomenalist view are
just a fortunate coincidence. Suffocation, starvation, burning, and so on are
correlated with unpleasant experiences; while eating, rest, and sex are
correlated with pleasure. If epiphenomenalism is true, it just as easily
could’ve been the other way around. Why? Because experiences are invisible to
natural selection. They play no role in motivating behavior, since they play
no causal role at all.

> …why is pain correlated with stimuli detrimental to survival and
> reproduction – such as suffocation, hunger and burning? And why is pleasure
> correlated with stimuli beneficial to survival and reproduction – such as
> eating and breathing? According to the argument, the fact that we have these
> particular correlations and not other ones must have an evolutionary
> explanation. But given epiphenomenalism, differences in phenomenal
> properties could not cause differences in fitness, so natural selection
> would not be expected to favor these correlations over any other ones.
> Epiphenomenalism thus renders these correlations an inexplicable
> coincidence, and should therefore be rejected.

        1. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7f39ae39f9d5474ff470611ad3b4e691?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **Alex Popescu** says:

          1. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fa6212456ab617d2fc0898136bec5d0d?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **[SelfAwarePatterns](http://selfawarepatterns.com)** says:

                    1. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7f39ae39f9d5474ff470611ad3b4e691?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **Alex Popescu** says:

He asserts that phenomenal consciousness doesn’t exist, but then is forced to
talk about the appearance of phenomenal properties, which he labels “pseudo-
phenomenal properties”, or “quasi-qualia”. But when it comes to phenomena, it
seems like the appearance is what we’re referring to. So the appearance of the
phenomena is the phenomena. Which means the appearance (or illusion) of
phenomenal consciousness is phenomenal consciousness.

Thanks for the extended explanation. I think everything you describe is true,
from a subjective point of view. It’s from the objective set of perspectives
that we can in fact reduce qualities. I often use the example of a software
bit. Within the dynamics of the software, a bit is a fundamental irreducible
concept. But at the hardware level, a bit is always implemented with some
piece of hardware, whether it be a transistor, vacuum tube, etc.

              2. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fa6212456ab617d2fc0898136bec5d0d?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **[SelfAwarePatterns](http://selfawarepatterns.com)** says:

If epiphenomenalism is true, mental causation is an illusion. Even if pain and
pleasure were inverted, you’d continue behaving in exactly the same way you do
now, since our experiences play no causal role whatsoever. Even if your visual
field was composed of undifferentiated static, you’d verbally report seeing a
sunset. Even if you intend to raise your arm, you may raise your eyebrows.
Your conscious intentions have _nothing to do_ with determining your physical
behavior. This is counterintuitive, to say the least. It also leaves us
completely unable to explain why our experiences line up appropriately with
our behavior, _just as if_ experiences are motivating behavior. It sure seems
like I’m eating good food that’s beneficial to survival and avoiding rotten
meat because of tastes and smells and so forth in consciousness. Presumably,
natural selection made it so that I recoil at rotting meat and am drawn to
good-smelling food. Those experiences _motivate_ and _incentivize_ those
adaptive behaviors, we typically think. This is not the case for
epiphenomenalists. So how is it then that the correlations illustrated by
James evolved if experiences are invisible to natural selection?

                1. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7f39ae39f9d5474ff470611ad3b4e691?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **Alex Popescu** says:

Whether the unit of natural selection is the gene, the individual, the group,
some combination thereof or something else entirely, selection is acting on
the physical behavior of natural processes. If epiphenomenalism is true,
consciousness has no influence over evolution for essentially the same reason
that other causally effete things – for instance, abstract objects like
numbers and triangles – have no influence over evolution. If conscious
experiences have no physical effects, they could not possibly cause
differences in genetic fitness.

This is also why I earlier mentioned how phenomenal states formed our
epistemological and semantical underpinnings. Without them, it appears that we
wouldn’t be able to understand what any terms actually mean, since we would
have no intrinsic referent. There is some controversy however over whether
this kind of relationism/structuralism can work or not, and whether it is
really true that we need intrinsicality as our foundation. Regardless of
whether that is true however, one can still believe in phenomenal
intrinsicality. You’re definitely not committed to the belief in the falsity
of structuralism/relationalism if you believe in phenomenal experiences. Also,
we can now better appreciate why the physical reduction program seems to be so
at odds with the concept of qualitativeness, since descriptions of physical
things seem to be inherently relational/dispositional.

If you accept that the appearance is the reality of phenomenal consciousness,
then you accept that phenomenal experiences exist. It doesn’t matter that we
can be radically mistaken about the nature of our experiences (or that they
might have physical aspects in addition to their qualitative aspects), what’s
important is that you’ve admitted that we are having phenomenal experiences.
Once you admit this, you have to deny physicalism. The middle ground
physicalism which tries to accept some degree of phenomenality fails because
any kind of phenomenality, by definition, is qualitative (and the physical is
just about the quantitative).

Anyway, I agree with the ontology of the illusionist, but I think both they
and anti-physicalists frame the issue in an unproductive manner. As Frankish
himself admitted, Eric Schwitzgebel’s “innocent” description of phenomenal
consciousness is compatible with illusionism. I agree with Schwitzgebel that
what Frankish calls the “illusion”, I’m just going to call phenomenal.

Got it. I thought you were advocating for an eliminativist physicalist
position or something. That said, if you are advocating for a sort of middle
ground physicalism, there are good reasons to think this can’t exist. For
example, Keith Frankish argues that there is no middle ground. If we want to
say that consciousness is reducible to the physical then we just have to
accept that qualitative experiences don’t exist, period.

Anyways, I am actually in agreement with you that yours and Frankish’s
position is mostly a definitional difference, but I actually think (no
offense) that you are on the wrong side of the semantic debate. To answer your
question, I am using the word ‘phenomenality’ to be inherently qualitatative,
and this is what makes it non-physical. You shouldn’t ‘reduce’ phenomenality
to strip it of qualitativeness (although of course you can) because this
defeats the entire point, meaning that it is supposed to be the word which
picks out the position staked out by Chalmer et al (Schwitzgebel’s take is
very much in the minority) This is not true of the word ‘appearance’ for
example, which is much more ambiguous. If you strip ‘phenomenality’ of this
meaning, then not only will you deprive yourself of the conceptual tools to
engage with the opposite side, but you will be doomed to talk past each other.
So don’t do that, just use the standard definitions as Frankish does and admit
that you think phenomenality doesn’t exist.

So _if_ you think we could potentially explain the correlations we observe
through natural selection, you must reject epiphenomenalism. That’s a
precondition for invoking natural selection. If you strip consciousness of any
causal influence, there is no chance that an evolutionary explanation could do
any work for you.

              1. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7f39ae39f9d5474ff470611ad3b4e691?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **Alex Popescu** says:

It’s important to note that this conception of phenomenal consciousness is not
synonymous with representation. There are deflationary accounts of
representation for example, where a brain state represents x just in case it
participates in the right kind of causal relations with x. But the kind of
representation I have in mind only exists if the brain states ‘construct’ the
right kind of virtual model. This also means that Frankish, when describing
the appearance of consciousness as just being attributable to a faulty
representation in the brain, must thereby endorse a deflationary account of
representation. Under physicalism, everything, including your representational
account, must be fully describable in physical terms.

I think the same is true for mental qualities. But we can’t reduce them from
the inside, because we lack the mechanisms to examine their underlying
dynamics. In this view, something being intrinsic is only intrinsic relative
to a particular point of view, of how much the model we’re using has been
abstracted away from the underlying reality. (At least above fundamental
physics.)

No offense taken. I think my stance makes sense from a functional and
evolutionary take, but I can see the reasons why some may not agree.

I’m pretty familiar with Frankish’s views. The difference between his view and
mine could be described as definitional. (Which I think describes a large
portion of philosophical differences.)

> There is … [a] set of facts which seem explicable on the supposition that
> consciousness has causal efficacy. It is a well-known fact that pleasures
> are generally associated with beneficial, pains with detrimental,
> experiences. All the fundamental vital processes illustrate this law.
> Starvation, suffocation, privation of food, drink and sleep, work when
> exhausted, burns, wounds, inflammation, the effects of poison, are as
> disagreeable as filling the hungry stomach, enjoying rest and sleep after
> fatigue, exercise after rest, and a sound skin and unbroken bones at all
> times, are pleasant. [Some] have suggested that these coincidences are due,
> not to any pre-established harmony, but to the mere action of natural
> selection which would certainly kill off in the long-run any breed of
> creatures to whom the fundamentally noxious experience seemed enjoyable. An
> animal that should take pleasure in a feeling of suffocation would, if that
> pleasure were efficacious enough to make him immerse his head in water,
> enjoy a longevity of four or five minutes. But if pleasures and pains have
> no efficacy, one does not see … why the most noxious acts, such as burning,
> might not give thrills of delight, and the most necessary ones, such as
> breathing, cause agony.

What’s the difference? The idea is that all (extrinsic) definitions are in
some sense relational, you might ask “what is x” and I will point to some
aspect of y. In turn you can ask “what is y” etc… It seems like we need some
intrinsic component of either x and/or y if we are to truly understand the
meaning of the terms, otherwise we’ll just keep going around in circles. So
phenomenal states are different from physical states because they are
intrinsically graspable, meaning that one doesn’t need to define a quale in
terms of some other thing to understand what it is. One can achieve
understanding just by being immediately acquainted with it. For example, it
seems like you can know or be acquainted with what phenomenal ‘red’ is like
just by experiencing it. You don’t need to have an understanding of other
phenomenal colors or of the concept of color in order to understand this. Yet,
it seems like the physical concept of red (the wavelength) can’t be understand
unless defined in terms of other colors/wavelengths.

What would you say are the differences between “phenomenal” and “appearance”?
Without using circular synonyms, what would you say “phenomenal” has that
“appearance” lacks? What prevents us from reducing the phenomenal in the same
way you reduced appearance?

I don’t think removing dualism from your ontology means removing
consciousness. It does mean accepting that consciousness isn’t what it seems.
But that only means accepting what psychological research has been
demonstrating for decades, that introspection is an unreliable source of
information.

As an aside, I’ll mention that epiphenomenalists should seriously consider
becoming theists, since they’ve unintentionally brought about a good argument
for a benevolent designer. If epiphenomenalism is true, then we’re
exceptionally fortunate to find ourselves in a harmoniously tuned mental
world. A benevolent designer could explain our good fortune, but
epiphenomenalism on its own cannot. Even epiphenomenalism plus natural
selection cannot. So in the absence of some other hypothesis that makes the
valuable, harmonious correlations more likely, epiphenomenalism is
spectacularly implausible.

                    2. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fa6212456ab617d2fc0898136bec5d0d?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **[SelfAwarePatterns](http://selfawarepatterns.com)** says:

The problem of course is that we’re speaking of consciousness, which is the
one thing we are supposed to be the surest of. Stripping consciousness from
your ontology is an epistemological death sentence, since qualitative
experiences are the closest thing we have to an epistemological foundation. We
(most of us at least) believe in scientific theories precisely because they
are the best explanations of our qualitative experiences etc. Without
consciousness it would be hard (impossible?) to justify any of our beliefs
about the external world.

            1. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7f39ae39f9d5474ff470611ad3b4e691?s=100&d=identicon&r=G) **Alex Popescu** says:

I think all functional/dispositional/physical definitions of
qualia/phenomenality, including yours, will be insufficient yes. That’s not to
say that qualitative experiences can’t be functional/categorical, just that
the functional definition won’t capture its essence. Personally, I think I
would define qualia/phenomenality as being intrinsic. They are not meant to be
captured under any extrinsic definition like a functional one.

Imagine that pain and pleasure were inverted: behavior that usually brought
about painful experiences instead brought about pleasant experiences, and vice
versa. Poking yourself in the eye with a stick felt like quenching your
thirst. Eating a good meal felt like being burned. Adaptive behavior felt
excruciating, while maladaptive behavior was rewarding. To make matters worse,
you continue behaving in the same ways you ordinarily do in this nightmarish
world: you helplessly watch your own limbs move, as you go on doing things
that were agonizingly painful.

_Epiphenomenalism_ is the view that consciousness has no physical effects.
Mental events are superfluous to the physical activity in the brain –
experiences have _no effect_ on physical events or on one another.
Epiphenomenalists take the physical realm to be causally closed: every
physical event involved in human behavior and brain functioning has a
sufficient causal explanation in terms of prior physical events. Mental events
exert no causal influence whatsoever.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F05%2F07%2Fwilliam-james-evolutionary-argument-against-epiphenomenalism%2F&signup_flow=account)

This is an abductive argument: an inference to the best explanation. What
needs explaining is the fact that pain is generally correlated with stimuli
detrimental to survival and reproduction, while pleasure is generally
correlated with stimuli beneficial to survival and reproduction. On
epiphenomenalism, there is no reason to expect _these_ correlations. In fact,
it is at least equally likely that maladaptive behavior would systematically
correlate with positive hedonic states. (For the record, these alternative
correlation schemes don’t have to be nightmarish pain/pleasure inversion
scenarios. The correlations could have been something hedonically neutral, but
still mismatching and disharmonious.) “Luck” is not a good explanation of the
systematic correlations we observe. I don’t think that the correlations are
the product of pure chance and good fortune, so I think epiphenomenalism is
false.

I’m sure from your viewpoint, you’ll see this as me just evoking an illusion.
In truth, although I dislike the label “illusion”, ontologically I agree with
the illusionists.

It seems like when we reach the point where we’re saying something has no
causal effects in the world, we’re trying too hard to keep it in our ontology.
For anyone who sees epiphenomenalism as tempting, they should probably take a
hard look at their commitment to dualism.

The term “quasi-qualia” is a misnomer since it implies that some kind of
qualia still remain. Another term that Frankish uses as a synonym is “zero
qualia”, which I think gets the point across much clearer. Contrast with the
weak illusionists’ “diet qualia” which is much more like what you are talking
about (where we are having some phenomenal experience that is being grossly
misinterpreted).

Frankish is using the phrase appearance in an intrinsically non-phenomenal
sense. When Frankish says that it ‘appears’ that we are conscious, he only
means it in the sense that our brain has representational neural states which
are about (fictional) phenomenal states. He’s not saying that we are
phenomenally experiencing fictional qualitative experiences; that would indeed
be self-defeating. Anyways, Frankish is arguing against the exact kind of weak
illusionism that you espouse, and I agree with his arguments (although I take
the opposite stance from him).

The reason this hellish existence seems so far-fetched is that we ordinarily
take our experiences to have causal efficacy. Pain and pleasure often
_motivate_ what you do. The unpleasantness of hunger and the satisfaction of
eating a good meal are more than enough to incentivize the right actions. But
what if your mind had no causal influence over your behavior? What if your
feelings, experiences, sensations, and so on were completely superfluous to
the physical workings of your brain and body? Then the hellish world would be
possible. If epiphenomenalism is true, then mental causation is just an
illusion. Even if the experiences of pain and pleasure were inverted, you’d
behave in exactly the same way you do now.

> This paper develops a new argument from consciousness to theism: the
> argument from psychophysical harmony. Roughly, psychophysical harmony
> consists in the fact that phenomenal states are correlated with physical
> states and with one another in strikingly fortunate ways. . . . we argue
> that psychophysical harmony is strong evidence for theism. Since God has
> reason to design the psychophysical laws in order to bring about the values
> realized by psychophysical harmony, theism makes harmony much more likely
> than it would otherwise be. . . . the argument still works if we accept (or
> we are open to) alternative views about consciousness, such as dualist
> interactionism, physicalism, idealism, or Russellian monism.

I was recently [joined by Dr. Dustin Crummett to discuss a new argument from
consciousness](https://youtu.be/auahudU1C08) for theism. (Though
psychophysical harmony _is_ evidence for theism, it may be equally good
evidence for non-theistic hypotheses that I find interesting, like axiarchism
and natural teleology.) This is from the introduction of[ the
paper](https://philarchive.org/rec/CUTPHA):

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F05%2F04%2Fthe-argument-from-psychophysical-harmony-w-dustin-crummett%2F&signup_flow=account)

Since I’m drawing frequent comparisons with theism, I’ll point out that this
exact progression is mirrored on the theistic side. Just as naturalists must
give content to “the natural world” after defining their position as “there is
only the natural world,” Theists must give content to “God” after defining
theism as “God exists.” There isn’t much a theist can say in their attempt to
elaborate theism and put some flesh on the bones that won’t exclude vast
numbers of other theists. God exists; he has attributes A and B but not
attributes C and D; his prophet was person X but not person Y, and _certainly_
not person Z; and so on and so forth. Theism, like naturalism, is a quite
general term that functions more as a starting point.

As Oppy explained earlier, naturalism entails atheism. Though some atheists
are not naturalists, the two ideas are intimately connected. There is a
tradition of atheistic anti-physicalism, and I thought it’d be worth naming a
few names: Thomas Nagel, Noam Chomsky, David Chalmers, Philip Goff, Peter
Sjöstedt-Hughes, Bertrand Russell, Nietzsche, and Schopenhauer, to list a few.

Though, as I mentioned, many physicalist naturalists don’t make this mistake.
Sean Carroll, a prominent physicist and defender of naturalism, defines
naturalism thusly:

> Even though the theistic outlook, in some versions, is consistent with the
> available scientific evidence, I don’t believe it, and am drawn instead to a
> naturalistic, though non-materialist, alternative. Mind, I suspect, is not
> an inexplicable accident or a divine and anomalous gift but a basic aspect
> of nature that we will not understand until we transcend the built-in limits
> of contemporary scientific orthodoxy.
>
> Thomas Nagel

In a moment, I want to return to one thing Oppy says about “a prior
understanding of the distinction between the natural and the supernatural” and
how we might inform this distinction via “use theory.”

Since no one sees a problem with the word “theism,” and everyone understands
that a Mormon and a Hindu can both be theists without rendering the term
“theism” meaningless, I see no reason to treat “naturalism” any differently.
Panpsychists and reductive materialists can both be naturalists, since both of
their positions are compatible with the view that reality is exhausted by
nature.

He goes on to explain that “the physical” is experiential in its intrinsic
character ( _experience_ in the sense that any conscious creature is familiar
with by virtue of being a conscious creature). According to Strawson, physics
is quite abstract. It tells us about the structure and behavior of the
physical, but it doesn’t tell us anything one way or the other about the
concrete stuff that exemplifies the abstract, structural, behavioral
description provided by physical science. Our mathematical physical models
could be describing concrete non-experiential reality, but they could also be
describing concrete experiential reality, of the kind with which we’re
directly familiar.

Naturalists, according to David Papinau, author of the Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy entry on naturalism, believe “that reality is exhausted by
nature, containing nothing ‘supernatural’.” Naturalism “has no very precise
meaning in contemporary philosophy” beyond this, along with an emphasis on
science as a means to understand the natural world.

Though if I only had a minute to define naturalism and put some meat on the
bones, I would probably steal philosopher of mind Luke Roelofs’ answer in his
book _Combining Minds_ :

What is the natural world, anyway? My view is open-ended. That’s a feature,
not a bug, since the nature of nature is open-ended. I have my own views, but
I wouldn’t go so far as to say that anyone who doesn’t conceive of nature in
the exact way that I do isn’t a naturalist.

Debates between theists and atheists often don’t tread on territory beyond “Is
there an omnipotent, omniscient, maximally good designer of the natural
world?” (By the way, even this goes beyond the mere statement “God exists.”
Those are particular ideas about the nature of God.) I’m sure the point I’ve
been making throughout is not lost on you: there’s a kind of parity between
naturalism and theism. If theism is an acceptable term, then so is naturalism.
If theism is not meaningless, then neither is naturalism. If it’s acceptable
to define theism as “God exists,” then it’s acceptable to define naturalism as
“There is only the natural world.”

So, my conception of a naturalist is simply one who believes in only the
natural world, that there are none but natural causes, that reality is
exhausted by nature, etc. However, if you lead with that, everyone’s brain
will short-circuit, since you used the word “natural” in the definition of
“naturalism.” This is an irritating tendency, since no one has a serious
problem with words like “theism,” which is equivalent to “God-ism.” If you
don’t have a problem with the term “theism,” I can’t imagine what your problem
would be with “naturalism.” Naturalism is the beginning of the story, not the
end. If you’re a naturalist, you have more work to do in order to flesh out
your worldview. Just like “theism,” it’s only the beginning of the story.

Some theists and even naturalists will, for some reason, define naturalism in
a way that excludes consciousness from playing any role in fundamental
reality, indeed, any significant or creative role at all. (I should mention
that many naturalists _don’t_ do this, including physicalist naturalists.) But
this all seems very odd to me. On the part of naturalists, it seems to be a
bizarre and unnecessary concession. The concession is this: consciousness is,
in some important sense, not natural. That’s the implication, isn’t it? Why
else would views which regard consciousness as fundamental be excluded from
the naturalist camp _unless_ consciousness isn’t natural, in some sense? As
I’m sure you can guess by now, I find this suggestion patently absurd.
Experience is our first and fundamental datum, whether we’re naturalists or
theists or anything else. Treating experience as a _problem_ or something to
be explained away is a tendency that I’ll never understand and don’t care to.
But other naturalists feel differently. I would only ask that they don’t
exclude people like David Chalmers from the naturalist camp. As I mentioned,
drawing a line in the sand when it comes to consciousness, a contentious and
controversial area of study that’s so far from settled, seems especially
bizarre to me.

> “I am moved by strange sympathies; I say continually ‘I will be a
> naturalist.'”
>
> Ralph Waldo Emerson

> “I’m a naturalist, an out-and-out naturalist, a philosophical or
> metaphysical naturalist, a naturalist about concrete reality. I don’t think
> anything supernatural or otherwise non-natural exists.
>
> You can’t classify anything as supernatural or non-natural until you have a
> substantive conception of the natural in relation to which something can be
> classified as non-natural. I do have one: I take it that concrete reality –
> anything that exists in space-time – is entirely physical.”

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F08%2F18%2Fwhat-is-naturalism%2F&signup_flow=account)

The point is not that you have to agree with any of these shorthand accounts
of the natural world. The point is to sketch out how naturalism can start with
something simple like “There is only the natural world” and work from there to
a more elaborated, substantive worldview.

> “Naturalism is a philosophy according to which there is only one world — the
> natural world, which exhibits unbroken patterns (the laws of nature), and
> which we can learn about through hypothesis testing and observation. In
> particular, there is no supernatural world — no gods, no spirits, no
> transcendent meanings.
>
> I like to talk about a particular approach to naturalism, which can be
> thought of as Poetic. By that I mean to emphasize that, while there is only
> one world, there are many ways of talking about the world. “Ways of talking”
> shouldn’t be underestimated; they can otherwise be labeled “theories” or
> “models” or “vocabularies” or “stories,” and if a particular way of talking
> turns out to be sufficiently accurate and useful, the elements in its
> corresponding vocabulary deserve to be called real.”
>
> Sean Carroll

The term theism derives from the Greek _theos_ or _theoi_ meaning “god” or
“gods.” “God-ism” doesn’t sound quite as illuminating, but that’s essentially
what “theism” means. “God-ism is the view that God exists” is identical with
“Theism is the view that God exists.” So why should “Naturalism is the view
that there is only the natural world” be held to a different standard? Sure,
naturalism isn’t the whole story. To explain the substance of their views,
naturalists will need to elaborate further. Similarly, everyone understands
that “theism” isn’t the whole story: further elaboration is required. And yet,
despite this, theism is not a meaningless weasel-word, hopelessly circular, or
anything of the sort.

Relatedly, another question that often comes up in a discussion like this is
the distinction between the natural and the supernatural. In a moment we’ll
briefly discuss “use theory” and how it can provide a meaningful distinction
between the two. But here, I wanted to offer one potential heuristic for
drawing the demarcation between “natural” and “supernatural”: the natural
world is that which theists and atheists agree on—stuff we both think is real.
Rocks, the ecosystem, bacteria, electrons; not angels, heaven, God. We agree
that rocks, the ecosystem, bacteria, and electrons exist. We don’t agree that
angels, heaven, and God exist. The natural world is whatever common ground
exists between atheists and theists. Of course, there are counterexamples and
edge cases here, but this is intended to be general. And certainly atheists
and theists are not monolithic groups who agree totally on what exists.
Nevertheless, this heuristic seems like a helpful way of beginning to
demarcate natural and supernatural. Angels? Definitely supernatural. Rocks?
Definitely natural. (This heuristic isn’t essential to my main contentions
about naturalism, so you can take it or leave it.)

> “By ‘naturalism’ I mean the view that the world contains a single basic type
> of stuff, whose behavior is governed by a single set of simple, general
> laws, and that these laws are those revealed by science. The most common
> version of naturalism among contemporary philosophers is physicalism, the
> view that the world is entirely made up of matter, and matter is
> exhaustively described by physics. But some philosophers reject physicalism,
> even while accepting naturalism, holding that matter is not exhaustively
> described by physics—there are fundamental aspects of matter that physics is
> blind to. In particular (they tend to say), there are certain things each of
> us can know about matter, such as that one particular portion of matter (the
> one between our ears) sometimes feels and thinks and experiences, which go
> beyond both what physics itself says and what can be deduced from any
> physical description, no matter how detailed. Because facts about my
> consciousness are left out by any purely physical descriptions, these
> ‘naturalistic anti-physicalists’ infer that consciousness must be itself a
> fundamental feature of reality, no more derivable from physical properties
> than mass is derivable from charge.”
>
> Luke Roelofs

[Is God the Best Explanation of Things? A Dialogue – Joshua Rasmussen & Felipe
Leon](https://www.palgrave.com/gp/book/9783030237516) (this wasn’t mentioned
in the episode, but Leon does a wonderful job fleshing out “liberal
naturalism”

So you’re a theist. God exists, but what do you mean by “God”? Are you a
polytheist, a pantheist, a Mormon, a Catholic? Theists disagree on the nature
of God. Similarly, naturalists disagree on the question “What is the natural
world?” and “What is meant by ‘natural’?” Though, our disagreements haven’t
(yet) led to bloodshed.

> “Naturalism is not physicalism or materialism, and naturalization does not
> require physicalization or physical reduction.”
>
> Jaegwon Kim

> Languages and linguistic entities are not bloodless abstract objects that
> can be studied like specimens under a microscope. Rather, language takes the
> form of behavior, activity—specifically social practice. Sentences do not
> have lives of their own. The things we write on blackboards, and the alleged
> “propositions” they express, are fairly violent abstractions from the
> utterings performed by human beings in real-world contexts on particular
> occasions. […] Expressions…are noises we make that have socially defined
> functional roles; there are appropriate occasions for using them,
> inappropriate occasions for using them, and appropriate responses. When we
> talk of their meanings, we mean the functions they characteristically
> perform in the context of our current social practices.
>
> William Lycan

While some naturalists like Daniel Dennett think that phenomenal consciousness
doesn’t exist in the natural world, it’s absurdly narrow to exclude realists
about phenomenal consciousness from the naturalist camp. What _is_ the natural
world, anyway? That issue is far from settled. A specific hypothesis or set of
hypotheses about what the natural world consists of should not get to lay
exclusive claim to naturalism. Drawing a line in the sand when it comes to
consciousness seems especially absurd.

Philosopher of religion Graham Oppy, in his book _The Best Argument Against
God_ , provides another useful definition:

Naturalism is the view that there is only the natural world. I defend this
simple conception of naturalism, ward off a few criticisms, and argue that
there’s a kind of parity between the terms “theism” and “naturalism.” In other
words, if you don’t have a problem with the term “theism,” you shouldn’t have
a problem with “naturalism.”

If naturalism is the view that there is only the natural world, that leads to
the question, “What is the natural world?” Here’s how philosopher Galen
Strawson fleshes out his naturalism:

Some version of the “use” approach also seems to provide yet another path for
elaborating a version of naturalism, or can at least helpfully supplement
one’s efforts (which is how I’m more inclined to use it). So, if you’ve been
keeping track, the naturalist has several potential options for fleshing out
naturalism, beginning with a rather straightforward and uncomplicated
definition

Some naturalists seem to think that “naturalism” must mean “physicalism,” but
I don’t think that’s quite right, since we already have a word for
physicalism. And even if we agree that “the natural” is exhausted by “the
physical,” “the physical” is similarly elusive and indeterminate. Like the
term theism, physicalism and naturalism immediately run into the issue of
defining “physical” and “nature,” questions which are only slightly less
contentious than the nature of God.

Naturalism is the view that there is only the natural world—reality is
exhausted by nature. Really, I think this simple definition gets the job done.
The rest of our time will be spent navigating potential objections and
defending this straightforward conception of naturalism.

There are, as you’re no doubt aware, quite different ways of fleshing out
naturalism. One could go with Strawson in saying that there is only the
natural world, the natural world is exhausted by the physical, science
uncovers the behavior of the physical, but the concrete nature of the physical
is wholly non-experiential. That would be a more ordinary conception of
physicalism.

So, Naturalism is the view that there is only the natural world. But what is
the natural world? No one really knows, so it seems premature to give hard and
fast, determinate answers and go on to say, “This is the one true
interpretation of NATURALISM.” Look, go ahead and take a stab at answering,
“What is the natural world, anyway?” Go for it. But do not then declare your
answer to be the One True Form of Naturalism.

> “Naturalism says that causal reality is natural reality: the domain of
> causes is nothing more nor less than the natural world. Atheism says that
> there are no gods; in consequence, atheism says that there is no God.
> Naturalism entails atheism: if causal reality is natural reality, then there
> is no (supernatural) cause of natural reality, and, in particular, there is
> no God. But atheism does not entail naturalism: to deny that there are gods
> is not to insist that causal reality is natural reality. . . .
> Supernaturalism says that causal reality outstrips natural reality: there
> are supernatural causes. . . . This ‘minimal’ conception of naturalism
> relies on a prior understanding of the distinction between the natural and
> the supernatural (as did our ‘minimal’ conception of theism). We shall
> proceed on the assumption that we do understand this distinction well
> enough. If we come to have doubts about whether we do understand this
> distinction well enough, then we can return to give it more careful
> consideration. ‘Minimal naturalism’ admits of elaboration in many different
> – mutually inconsistent – ways. Any suitably elaborated naturalism will hold
> that some features of the natural world are primitive – not susceptible of
> further explanation – whereas other features of the natural world are fully
> explained in terms of those primitive features. Thus, for example, some
> naturalists suppose that all of the primitive features of the natural world
> are physical features – i.e. features that lie in the proper domain of the
> discipline of physics. Other naturalists suppose that there are features of
> the natural world . . . that cannot be fully explained in terms of the
> fundamental physical properties. The key point to note is that all
> naturalists suppose that there are no supernatural causal properties…”
>
> Graham Oppy

Another naturalist might say there is only the natural world, the natural
world is exhausted by the physical world, and the physical world is entirely
characterized by structure and relations: structure is all there is.

There’s clearly no conflict between non-physicalism and the claim that god
doesn’t exist, nor is there a conflict between non-physicalism and the claim
that there is only the natural world. However, many haven’t bothered to
entertain non-physicalism because of its sociological connotations. Non-
physicalism is not an inherently religious viewpoint, nor is it inherently
“new age” or anti-naturalist. You can be an atheist and a naturalist while
rejecting physicalism. At any rate, I thought I’d include this as a footnote
to the larger discussion.

Earlier, Oppy said that his minimal conception of naturalism “relies on a
prior understanding of the distinction between the natural and the
supernatural.” I don’t know much about philosophy of language, but lately I’ve
found myself increasingly sympathetic to claims like, “If we know how to _use_
the term, it has meaning,” and “Providing necessary and sufficient conditions
for naturalism (i.e., providing a foolproof definition) isn’t required for the
term to be meaningful, since that’s not how words and meaning actually work.”
It’s certainly nice to have clear necessary and sufficient conditions that
admit of no counterexamples or borderline cases, but this actually isn’t
needed for a concept to be meaningful.

So, naturalism is the view that there is only the natural world—reality is
exhausted by nature. (But what is the natural world? That’s the real
question.) The term “naturalism” is a bit like the term “theism.” It’s not
meaningless, but it’s not terribly informative. To put it mildly, theists
disagree with one another about the nature of God. Does that mean theism is a
meaningless term that should be discarded? No, it just means “theism” is a
more general term. Joseph Smith, the prophet Muhammed, Billy Graham, and
Deepak Chopra are all theists. They all subscribe to “theism.” Why can’t
naturalism be a similarly big tent?

I think most people have some sense of what counts as a natural thing and what
counts as a supernatural thing—they have an idea of when to use the word
“natural” and when it would seem inappropriate (rocks and electrons are
obviously not supernatural). So if meaning is use, then “natural” is
meaningful. From this point, we can go on to say a natural-ist is one who
believes in only natural things (there are none but natural causes, reality is
exhausted by nature, and so on).

So for Strawson, naturalism means there is only the natural world. The natural
world is exhausted by the physical, and the physical itself is experience. The
behavior of the physical is modeled by physical science, but the concrete
reality which underlies that abstract description is experience.

Use theory (or at least, my limited and crude understanding of use theory) is
not essential to my main contentions about naturalism. I’m attempting to
substantiate how one might have, as Oppy put it, “a prior understanding of the
distinction between the natural and the supernatural,” which is relevant,
since “all naturalists suppose that there are no supernatural causal
properties.”

“Well, I guess the argument wasn’t _really_ fallacious then. It seems like a
fallacy was committed, but that was just a false positive.” Yes, that’s the
point! It’s way too easy to misfire, even if everyone involved is acting in
good faith and isn’t unreasonable. What would we do with a metal detector that
misfired as often as this? Would we keep it, or would we throw it away?

Take a look at nearly any book on critical thinking and you’ll come across a
list of fallacies: _ad hominem_ , argument from ignorance, the naturalistic
fallacy, god of the gaps, appeal to authority. Informal logical fallacies like
these are invoked very often in the skeptic community and elsewhere. The
problem is that many of these “fallacies” closely resemble good lines of
reasoning. Just because an argument can be superficially labeled fallacious
doesn’t actually mean it’s a bad argument. Overreliance on fallacy lists
fosters shallow criticism, distracts from the substance of an issue, and
doesn’t even accomplish the ostensible purpose of demarcating good and bad
reasoning. For those reasons, I think we should be a lot less trigger-happy in
this area.

“Why do so many rich people financially support economically right-wing
figures and outlets? Why aren’t there more billionaires supporting
economically left-wing figures and outlets? Probably just because the ideas
are better.”

> Not even the most superstitious person believes that correlation
> _automatically_ implies causation, or that any succession of two events A
> and B implies that A caused B. There are just too many things going on in
> the world, and not enough causal connections to account for them. In its
> clear-cut deductive guise, the _post hoc ergo propter hoc_ inference is a
> fallacy, to be sure, but hardly anyone makes it in real life. This is the
> first prong of the Fallacy Fork. So what about the kind of _post hoc_
> arguments that people do use in real life? (Pinto 1995) As it turns out,
> many of those are not obviously mistaken. It all depends on the context.

I know I’m being hard on skeptics and fallacy enthusiasts here, but that’s
because I used to lean on this crutch! In earlier episodes of Counter
Apologetics, you can hear me invoking these fallacies and dusting off my
hands. But as time went on, this tapered off. The usefulness of this approach
struck me as less and less credible, and talk about fallacies became quite
rare. I started rolling my eyes when I heard them mentioned at all.
Thankfully, philosophers like Boudry and Huemer put into words what was so
annoying and counterproductive about this mode of thinking.

I definitely agree with you about this, and had much the same journey.

One egregious example of a false positive I came across _in a logic textbook_
dismissed all consideration of material interests as fallacious _ad hominem_
reasoning. One who took this advice would lead a quite confused existence.
“Gee, I guess all that scientific research from the tobacco business that
shows smoking doesn’t cause cancer is genuine. I mean, it’d be completely
fallacious to treat that research with skepticism because of their material
interests at stake.” Not everyone is arguing in good faith. And even many who
_are_ approaching things in good faith are being elevated and promoted by
those who aren’t. Fringe perspectives are often given far more than their fair
share of airtime for that reason.

The idea that logical fallacies can be set aside amounts to “moving the
goalposts.” “My argument is not logical? Well then, I’ll attack logic itself…”
I would expect nothing less from the mind of an atheist.

In a discussion, if one were to accuse me of committing some informal logical
fallacy, I’d be a lot more likely to try to explain that I’m _not_ committing
that fallacy rather than, in that instance, cast doubt on fallacy theory as a
whole. But it sure would be nice if we didn’t have to deal with these setbacks
in the first place. Shouldn’t we try prevention, rather than endlessly play
bad fallacy whack-a-mole? Sure, many use fallacies poorly, and that could
theoretically be remedied. But they’re _so likely_ to use them wrong, it would
be better to stigmatize the entire practice. You shouldn’t try to fly that
helicopter unless you’re an expert. Fallacies are also more likely to be
misused if they’re invoked on a whim. They’re still likely to be misused even
if they’re not invoked on a whim, but it’s comparatively more likely if they
are.

“Hey, why did those oil companies cover up their knowledge of climate change
for decades? Was it for some scientific reason?”

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F04%2F21%2Flogical-fallacies%2F&signup_flow=account)

“Fallacy,” in its most basic sense, just means “mistake in reasoning.”
Clearly, there’s no problem with identifying mistakes in reasoning, but
assessing arguments is not always easy. Many have nevertheless tried to come
up with shorthand lists of fallacies that reliably separate the wheat from the
chaff. This has not gone so well. It does not seem as if there is any tidy
master list of irrational moves that we can simply cross-check with a given
argument and conclusively settle the matter. While there’s no issue to be
taken with “fallacy” in the basic sense – we obviously want to identify
mistakes in reasoning – there are a number of problems with the mode of
thinking one can find on display wherever fallacy lists are waved around. Do
the arguments made out in the wild really accord with these abstract
blueprints? Or is it the case, [as some philosophers have
argued](https://maartenboudry.be/2017/06/the-fallacy-fork-why-its-time-to-
get.html), that “fallacy theory” is a simplistic, facile approach to assessing
arguments?

> I think the fallacy lists lure people into thinking that some perfectly good
> inferences are wrong, because these perfectly good inferences sound like
> what the fallacy definitions are talking about.

The stubborn plausibility of false positives is crucial here. A reasonable
person could say, “It sounds like you just committed the X Fallacy.” And I’d
say, “Yeah, you’re right. It _does_ sound like I committed the X Fallacy. And
yet, the argument makes sense.”

[The Fake, the Flimsy, and the Fallacious: Demarcating Arguments in Real Life
– Maarten Boudry, Fabio Paglieri & Massimo Pigliucci
](https://philpapers.org/rec/BOUTFT)

It would be convenient to have a handy list of fallacy blueprints, which we
could use to identify bad reasoning, totally abstracted away from the specific
content and dialectical context. Sadly, the real world doesn’t seem to conform
to these hopes. As much as this might scandalize the online skeptic community,
fallacies don’t really matter as much as they seem to think. Even if an
argument does plausibly sound like it commits something listed on
yourfallacyis dot com, the argument might not be a bad one.

“Why is the ownership and management of Starbucks and Amazon so ferociously
opposing unionization efforts right now? Well, let’s get in the Amazon
classroom to watch a helpful informational video providing some arguments and
evidence that unions are bad to find out!”

We need to move past this point-scoring way of doing philosophy. It tends to
produce uncharitable, shallow criticisms – the sooner we can accuse someone of
begging the question or the such-and-such fallacy, the better. It’s boring,
I’m tired of it, and it actively prevents us from thinking. In the words of
Boudry, “Even bad ideas don’t deserve bad criticism.” And the hyper-focus on
fallacies overwhelmingly yields bad criticism.

> Imagine you eat some mushrooms you picked in the forest. Half an hour later
> you feel nauseated, so you put two and two together: “Ugh. That must have
> been the mushrooms”. Are you committing a fallacy? Not as long as your
> inference is merely inductive and probabilistic. Intuitively, your inference
> depends on the following reasonable assumptions: 1) some mushrooms are toxic
> 2) it’s easy for a lay person like you to mistake a poisonous mushroom for a
> healthy one 3) nausea is a typical symptom of food intoxication 4) you don’t
> usually feel nauseated.

[Knowledge, Reality, and Value: A Mostly Common Sense Guide to Philosophy –
Michael Huemer](https://www.amazon.com/Knowledge-Reality-Value-Mostly-
Philosophy/dp/B091F5QTDS)

[The Fallacy Fork: Why It’s Time to Get Rid of Fallacy Theory – Maarten
Boudry](https://maartenboudry.be/2017/06/the-fallacy-fork-why-its-time-to-
get.html)

On the difficult question of how to discriminate between good and bad forms of
reasoning, Maarten Boudry, Fabio Paglieri, Massimo Pigliucci [in the journal
_Argumentation_ write](https://philpapers.org/rec/BOUTFT),

> After Sally presents an eloquent and compelling case for a more equitable
> taxation system, Sam asks the audience whether we should believe anything
> from a woman who isn’t married, was once arrested, and smells a bit weird.

Another example: genuine _ad hominems_ are rare. How often do we see arguments
or ideas rejected on the basis of unambiguously irrelevant information about
the party advancing them? The example case of an ad hominem on yourfallacyis
dot com is the following:

There’s plenty to be said in defense of the use of fallacies. As said at the
outset, there’s no issue with “fallacy” in the basic sense of “mistake in
reasoning.” Cherry-picking data is fallacious. Insulting the party advancing
an idea with irrelevant negative information in order to defeat their argument
would indeed be fallacious. And if you apply the common fallacies carefully,
with thought and deliberation, then they can be a useful tool. They can
function as a conversation starter, rather than a conversation stopper. In
other words, if the vast majority of fallacy enthusiasts start using them
completely differently than they’re currently using them, they’re clearly
salvageable. But when most people misuse a tool, at what point do we start
blaming the tool? If a new helicopter is manufactured, and 90% of them crash,
are we going to blame the individual operators each and every time? Are we
going to point to the 10% that don’t crash and say that there’s no problem
here; it’s always pilot error; people just misuse the tool?

This practice of constantly invoking logical fallacies is kind of pointless.
Crying foul at every turn doesn’t advance the conversation – it’s an
impediment to substantive dialogue. It’s not even clear that one has done
something irrational in apparently committing one of these fallacies. Fallacy
labels are casually invoked in a way that distracts from the substance of an
issue, yields shallow criticism, and doesn’t even accomplish the ostensible
purpose of demarcating good and bad reasoning.

This whole approach where one simply utters a fallacy from a list of fallacies
during a discussion prevents us from going deeper. Playing “fallacy gotcha”
might be a good strategy for generating views in a WWE-style YouTube debate,
but it’s not so good for generating more light than heat. It greatly
oversimplifies the process of seeking truth, and it conveniently reduces the
complex, messy actual world into something more manageable.

> This is a problem of demarcation akin to the one between science and
> pseudoscience, which has kept philosophers of science busy ever since Popper
> proposed his falsifiability criterion as a way of demarcating genuine
> science. In both cases, the initial attraction of pursuing such a
> demarcation project is to find some shortcut for dismissing bad theories or
> arguments, sparing us the effort of analyzing each and every specimen.
> Philosophers of science have given up on this silver bullet approach to
> demarcation (Pigliucci and Boudry 2013b). In argumentation theory, too,
> identifying fallacies has turned out to be more complicated than initially
> hoped for. . . . almost every known type of fallacy (both formal and
> informal) is closely related to forms of reasoning that are acceptable moves
> in a debate (Hahn and Oaksford 2006, 2007; Hansen and Pinto 1995; Walton
> 1992, 1995, 2010b; Yap 2012). In spite of this increased sophistication, the
> quest for silver bullets still seems to be part and parcel of the taxonomies
> of fallacies.

Discriminating between good reasoning and bad reasoning is no easy task, and
these taxonomies of fallacies function as shortcuts for thinking. Certain
abstract schemes of argumentation are deemed haram, and if an argument
plausibly fits into one of these fallacious argumentation schemes, then we’re
done.

How often does anything like that happen? False positives, however, are
abundant. There’s nothing fallacious about bringing up _relevant_ negative
information about the party involved (e.g., that a media outlet has a history
of lying is not irrelevant negative information). Additionally, lobbing
insults is sometimes mistaken as an _ad hominem_ argument. (Insulting someone
is not a “fallacy.”) Rejecting ideas and arguments on the basis of irrelevant
negative information about the party advancing them is not that common (e.g.,
your argument is bad because you have terrible fashion sense). Far more common
is an appeal to _relevant_ information about the party advancing the idea, or
just good ol’ fashioned insults.

Of course, you’d want to show why those ideas are wrong. But you’re going to
be taken for a ride if you deem it irrational to ever take into account who is
making the argument. You’ll be worse off if you can’t say “You’ve got
interests at stake here. That’s why you’re elevating those scientists,” or
those economists, etc. Though, I’m _not_ saying “Party X has interests at
stake. Case closed.” Only that it’s not illegitimate to take those interests
into account. In fact, it would be pretty irrational to _not_ take them into
account. You’d be significantly _worse_ at navigating the world and getting to
the truth of the matter.

> Every fallacy in the traditional taxonomy runs into a destructive dilemma
> that I call the Fallacy Fork: either it hardly ever occurs in real life, or
> it is not actually fallacious. […] arguments that are deemed ‘fallacious’
> according to the standard approach are always closely related to arguments
> that, in many contexts, are perfectly reasonable. Formally, the good and bad
> ones are indistinguishable. No argumentation scheme can succeed in capturing
> the difference, separating the wheat from the chaff.

My motivation here is to try to improve the quality of our discourse and
debates, and to encourage better understanding of different positions and
viewpoints. In that spirit, a suggestion I have for improving the quality of
our discourse is to lay off the fallacy accusations a bit. It would lead to a
more fruitful search for knowledge and understanding.

Let’s return to the helicopter analogy. What if we discovered that the
majority of these helicopters were flown by amateur pilots? (Many seasoned
pilots crashed as well, but it was mainly amateurs.) Maybe the conclusion we
should draw at that point is not that the new helicopter is faulty, but that
for whatever reason it’s harder to fly than other models. The problem with
fallacies is that everyone thinks they understand them. There’s no helicopter
crash that occurs when a YouTube debater erroneously accuses their opponent of
cherry-picking or fallaciously appealing to emotion, and there’s no safe
helicopter landing when one successfully identifies a genuine instance of
_post hoc_ reasoning. I don’t want to sound absolutist; fallacies _can_ be
used well. However, the current state leaves much to be desired.

Inferring that your nausea is the product of the wild mushrooms you ate thirty
minutes prior sounds a lot like the fallacy mentioned above. Yet, it’s a
perfectly reasonable inference to make. If we define our fallacies strictly
enough that they’re always fallacious, then they are incredibly rare. If we
define them less strictly so as to capture real-world inferences, they’re no
longer bad inferences and should not be regarded as fallacious. Inferring a
connection between dropping your laptop and it not working so well afterwards
is not an irrational inference, even though it sounds a lot like mistaking
correlation for causation.

Maarten Boudry [expands on this problem of false
positives](https://maartenboudry.be/2017/06/the-fallacy-fork-why-its-time-to-
get.html), describing a “fallacy fork,” which is a dilemma of sorts for those
who approach every issue with their hand hovering above the fallacy buzzer at
all moments:

The problem of false positives is no small issue, but there are other reasons
to want everyone to chill out a bit with the casual invocation of fallacies.
It almost always works as a conversation stopper, for one. It keeps the
discussion at a maddeningly superficial level. And since it gives many the
false impression that an argument is no longer defensible, it leads to
overconfidence and dogmatism.

As Michael Huemer notes in his book, [_Knowledge, Reality, and Value: A Mostly
Common Sense Guide to Philosophy_](https://www.amazon.com/Knowledge-Reality-
Value-Mostly-Philosophy/dp/B091F5QTDS),

Casually hitting the fallacy buzzer without putting much thought into it can
lull one into thinking they’ve “debunked” an argument when they’ve done no
such thing. It’s easy to mislabel something as fallacious, especially since
members of the Fallacy Brigade don’t seem very worried about false positives.
This bad habit stops people from thinking, and conveniently makes the world a
lot simpler.

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/), [atheist
community](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist-community/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [critical
thinking](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/critical-thinking/),
[criticism of fallacies](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/criticism-
of-fallacies/),
[critique](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/critique/), [critique of
fallacies](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/critique-of-fallacies/),
[debunked](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debunked/),
[epistemology](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/epistemology/),
[fallacies](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fallacies/), [fallacy
fork](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fallacy-fork/), [fallacy
lists](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fallacy-lists/), [fallacy
theory](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fallacy-theory/), [informal
logical fallacies](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/informal-
logical-fallacies/), [logical
fallacies](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/logical-fallacies/),
[maarten boudry](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/maarten-boudry/),
[michael huemer](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/michael-huemer/),
[misuse](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/misuse/),
[pigliucci](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/pigliucci/),
[skeptic](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptic/), [skeptic
community](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptic-community/),
[Skepticism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skepticism/)

Tagged [9/11](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/9-11/),
[Aliens](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aliens/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/), [conspiracy
theories](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/conspiracy-theories/),
[conspiracy theory](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/conspiracy-
theory/), [cringe](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/cringe/),
[jfk](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/jfk/), [michael
shermer](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/michael-shermer/),
[ness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ness/),
[neurologica](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/neurologica/),
[novella](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/novella/), [online
skeptic community](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/online-skeptic-
community/),
[parapsychology](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/parapsychology/),
[randi](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/randi/),
[skeptic](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptic/), [skeptic
community](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptic-community/),
[skeptic's guide](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptics-guide/),
[skeptic's guide to the
universe](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptics-guide-to-the-
universe/),
[Skepticism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skepticism/),
[uaps](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/uaps/),
[ufos](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ufos/), [why I left the
skeptic community](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/why-i-left-the-
skeptic-community/), [why I'm leaving the skeptic
community](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/why-im-leaving-the-
skeptic-community/)

This to me, is similar to being a freethinker. There is a script of what is
allowed freethinking, which does not include discussing any philosophy that
doesn’t support the agenda.  
I did a post about freethinking a while back in my ignorance, thinking it was
more about crowdsourcing ideations. I learned very quickly it is not.

I’ve come to think having a “freethinking” group will never work. By
definition any group will have a common purpose and beliefs, for cohesion
probably isn’t even possible otherwise. That will necessarily constrain
things. At the very least, it will be very difficult to prevent this.

That’s a loose description of what the skeptic community is, what they
believe, and why I have a problem with them. To reiterate: a number of
skeptics fail to live up to their professed values, including many leaders in
the skeptic community, who have repeatedly proven themselves to be
untrustworthy sources of information on the topics they speak about; and their
analysis of why people believe what they believe is often _astonishingly_
superficial.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F04%2F13%2Fhow-i-became-disillusioned-with-the-skeptic-community%2F&signup_flow=account)

The skeptic community, for me, was composed of a handful of organizations,
online groups, podcasts, and figureheads. Center for Inquiry (CFI), James
Randi Educational Foundation (JREF), the Skeptics Guide to the Universe, the
New Atheists, and various online groups, smaller podcasts, and so on. They
organized events like The Amazing Meeting, Skepticon, and other conferences
and conventions that discussed skepticism, atheism, science education,
activism, and other subjects.

For a more accurate picture of what these common skeptic targets believe and
why:

At a few points, I chose to use incendiary examples when I could have opted
for examples that weren’t so controversial. Typically, I see theism vs.
atheism taken as a case to illustrate some of the same points I made, but I
chose to rely mainly on conspiracy theories instead. So, for the same reason
some atheists are called “crypto-theists” for failing to have a sufficiently
crude understanding of theism that never strays from a disparaging tone, I
know I’ll be called a conspiracy theorist. That really can’t be helped. Within
the skeptic community, you cannot talk about some subjects in anything other
than an uncompromisingly derisive way.

This is not a “why I’m leaving the skeptic community” video, because I haven’t
been a part of the skeptic community for years at this point. Of course, my
experiences from within the community from (about) 2015-2019 might not reflect
yours. It seems that the character of the skeptic community has changed in the
intervening years, especially politically. I’m only speaking to my
experiences, the stories I heard, things I saw, etc. when I was an active
member of the online skeptic community.

In a nutshell, I think that genuine skepticism is far less important to the
skeptic community at large than the _kind of conclusions_ one comes to.
“Skepticism,” in practice, is just a list of beliefs you’re expected to adopt.
Much of the skeptic community doesn’t live up to its professed values, and
many leaders of the skeptic community have proven themselves to be
untrustworthy sources of information on the topics they speak about. They’ve
frequently misled me about what others believe and why. (I have another
related episode planned about the pointlessness of informal logical fallacies.
This is also an attack on skeptics, since casually invoking fallacies
constitutes about 90% of skeptics’ reasoning capacities.)

What are they skeptical of? God, bigfoot, parapsychology, conspiracy theories,
homeopathy, ghosts, dualism, aliens, and other things they take to be
irrational or pseudoscientific. People only believe in God, conspiracy
theories, souls, aliens, and so on because they suffer from cognitive biases
and are prone to committing informal logical fallacies.

I would also urge you to not take this as some kind of theory about the
skeptic community, followed by endnotes and citations. This is a mostly
disorganized and incomplete story about how I gravitated towards a certain
group and how I drifted away. I don’t begrudge anyone who wants to remain a
part of the skeptic community. I just don’t fit in there. I also don’t mean to
imply that _every_ skeptic is an incurious dogmatist and conformist. I respect
many skeptics and would vouch for a number of them.

For the record, this should not be seen as a comprehensive treatment of the
topics raised (e.g. conspiracy theories). My framework was the following:
Skeptics told me conspiracy theorists believed X for reason Y, but they were
often wrong on both counts. I used a few examples, but I wasn’t aiming to
provide a full account of what 9/11 truthers believe, or what alien abductees
think, nor was I trying to defend a rejection of the Warren Commission. (I
especially shied away from that last topic, since it’s a bit different from
the others for me. In the case of the JFK assassination, I’m more solidly on
the side of the conspiracy theorists. Along with the majority of Americans, I
don’t accept the Warren Commission.)

After watching your video I agree with you on much. Part of the problem with
skepticism is the same problem that religions face—any time something becomes
institutionalized it becomes corrupted. The alphas take over the narrative
(self interest) and leave genuine thinkers on the fringes —again and again.

> “From the perspective of philosophers, the point here is clear, even if [the
> author’s] conclusion is controversial. In the few instances I tried to use
> this thought experiment in teaching ethics to clinicians, they mostly found
> it a bad and confusing example. Their problem is that they know too much.
> For them, the example is physiologically and institutionally implausible,
> and problematically vague in relevant details of what happened and how. …
> Moreover, clinicians find this thought experiment bizarre in its complete
> lack of attention to other plausible real-world alternatives, such as
> dialysis or transplant. As a result, excellent clinicians might fail to even
> see the analogy with pregnancy, let alone find it helpful in their ethical
> reasoning about abortion.”

This is a serious limitation of thought experiments. It’s oftentimes difficult
to distinguish realistic from unrealistic circumstances, and it’s very hard to
distinguish acceptable from unacceptable conclusions. These two ingredients
that make a thought experiment worthwhile (a clearly unacceptable conclusion
under clearly imaginable circumstances) are hard to discern in practice.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2020%2F07%2F17%2Fare-ethical-thought-experiments-entirely-useless%2F&signup_flow=account)

Wilson makes another good point about “ethically relevant features” of a
situation: “Faced with people who don’t ‘get’ a thought experiment, the
temptation for philosophers is to say that these people aren’t sufficiently
good at isolating what is ethically relevant. Obviously, such a response risks
being self-serving, and tends to gloss over an important question: how should
we determine what are the ethically relevant features of a situation? Why, for
example, should a philosopher sitting in an armchair be in a better position
to determine the ethically relevant features of ‘The Violinist’ than someone
who’s worked with thousands of patients?”

Those two points pretty much capture my problem with ethical thought
experiments. Information has been added, and other information has been
subtracted, and the end result is that we’re talking about an alternate world
that only exists in our minds. Again, this is fine in other areas of
philosophy. But ethical philosophy is different: it’s supposed to guide our
moral actions in our real lives. That’s why the uncanny valley of simultaneous
lack and inclusion of detail is a problem.

One reason Wilson’s criticism of thought experiments appealed to me is because
I’m some sort of utilitarian, and philosophers love to conjure up ludicrous
thought experiments to demonstrate that utilitarianism is false. What if
everything was literally perfect, but it was only so because we were torturing
a young boy in a dungeon, because we struck a deal with a wizard who offered
the town this devil’s bargain? (I would say the fact that they have to create
a universe that does not exist to turn people against utilitarianism works
_against_ the point they’re trying to make.)

Most historians don’t believe that Galileo actually performed the experiment
of dropping two objects, a cannonball and a musket ball, from the leaning
tower of Pisa (or at least not as it’s reported by Galileo’s student). Of
course, if you wanted to demonstrate that two objects of different weights
fall at the same rate and reach the ground at the same time, you would want to
go try it out in the real world at some point. But in Galileo’s work _On
Motion_ , he doesn’t report any empirical data. Instead, he makes use of a
thought experiment to undermine Aristotelian physics.

I also think the resistance to speaking frankly about current events or real
scenarios is simply because it’s harder to do. It’s harder to talk about
torture in the real world or Israel/Palestine or abortion than it is to dream
up thought experiments that you claim are relevant to those issues. It’s
easier to create an imaginary world where there are no real stakes, where we
have more information about the consequences of our actions than we actually
would, and less information about all that annoying context. But what good
does that do us? This is applied moral philosophy. Isn’t it supposed to be
practical at some point? I don’t care what I should do in a world in which I
do not live!

What exactly follows from an ethical thought experiment? If we establish that
x or y action is wrong in the thought experiment, have we demonstrated that
it’s always wrong to do x or y? Have we demonstrated anything interesting at
all? What inevitably follows a thought experiment is some philosopher
insisting that thought experiment A is like real world situation B. But that
doesn’t follow. A doesn’t translate to B precisely because we’ve eliminated
several details from the real world scenario, and because we’ve often been
given too much information, information that we wouldn’t actually have (e.g.
information about the consequences of our actions).

Despite my criticism, I don’t think thought experiments are _entirely_
worthless. They’ve played an important role in the development of science and
philosophy, but I think I can safely say they often fail to clarify a
situation, especially in ethics. I’ve heard debaters get so lost in the
details of a thought experiment, which is not identical, and may not even be
_analogous_ to the subject at hand, that they lose sight entirely of the
actual subject of the debate. I’ve witnessed derailments like this in
philosophy of mind, in the kalam and fine-tuning arguments, as well as
numerous debates in moral philosophy. It’s especially in the latter case that
I think we need a massive reduction in the number of thought experiments.
Argue about real life! You will _never_ run out of material.

Philosophers, at this point, are likely tempted to think that they’re just
smarter than all these thickheaded doctors who can’t seem to follow the
stipulations of the thought experiment. But keep in mind, these particular
clinicians Wilson is telling us about are experts in this area. It’d be like
an expert in foreign policy, say on the Israel/Palestine conflict, trying and
failing to tell a philosophy student that their thought experiment, intended
to clarify the situation, actually muddies the waters in a way that’s totally
unhelpful. The more knowledge one possesses on a given subject, the less value
thought experiments tend to have. The problem with these hypotheticals is
precisely what moral philosophers like about them: they are idealized and
oversimplified versions of the world. They’re nearly always presented context-
free, but real world scenarios always come to us in a context. Thought
experiments are additionally presented with details about future consequences
that we simply wouldn’t have in real life. The end result is a scenario vastly
different from the ordinary scenarios in which our ethical sensibilities are
formed and exercised.

When you invoke some thought experiment to adjudicate a real world scenario,
you’re taking two disanalogous situations and insisting that they’re
analogous. I already know they’re disanalogous before I know any more detail
because one is a thought experiment and the other is the real world. Who knows
what subtleties have been lost in the sanitized, idealized, depersonalized
scenario.

But then there are ethical thought experiments, where thought experiments seem
to be the most abundant and the least helpful. If you ask me, these short
hypothetical scenarios are almost useless. They’re often presented context-
free, eliminating relevant detail. And in the course of probing our moral
intuitions, they often include detail that we wouldn’t have in the real world.
In the end, we’re discussing a hypothetical world vastly different from the
real world.

According to professor Patrick Grim, there are two crucial elements in a good
thought experiment: under clearly imaginable circumstances, a theory leads to
a clearly unacceptable conclusion. In this case, a contradiction. If the
circumstances are not really imaginable, either because they’re incoherent, or
don’t take into account our lack of information in some area, or some other
reason, then the thought experiment is about some world other than the one we
live in, and perhaps no world that even could exist. If the thought experiment
doesn’t lead us to a clearly unacceptable conclusion, then it doesn’t
undermine the theory in question. To borrow a couple more examples from
physics: Einstein’s theories predicted time dilation, and to many, that was
intuitively ridiculous. But it turns out time dilation wasn’t the clearly
unacceptable conclusion that some thought it to be. The same could be said of
Copernicus, who Martin Luther referred to as “that fool” who wanted to “turn
the whole of astronomy upside down.”

My point is not that talking about the real world is a flawless means of
arriving at moral truth. My point is that it’s far _less_ flawed than talking
about a thought experiment. I would say _fiction_ is far superior to thought
experiments. In a way, thought experiments are just really, really bad
fiction. A serious limitation of talking about the real world (or high-quality
fiction), is that the presentation of the real world scenario might be so
restricted and oversimplified that we end up right back where we started. A
drastically oversimplified account is no better than a thought experiment. On
the other hand, we might end up writing War and Peace if we try to fully flesh
out the context and morally relevant detail. But who said moral reasoning
would be easy? We should err on the side of complexity, not simplicity. To
quote Wilson, “[E]ven our best tools for [ethical thinking] are not very good.
Humility should be the watchword.”

> “Overall, ethical thought experiments are, at best, fallible ways of
> constructing simplified models that map rather imperfectly onto the world as
> we experience it, and can distort as much as they illuminate. … Responsible
> thinking requires calibrating our levels of credence to the reliability of
> our intellectual tools. Clearly, ethical thought experiments are not
> particularly reliable tools. But that’s not to say that we have other, more
> reliable tools. … Ethical thinking is hard, and even our best tools for
> doing it are not very good. Humility should be the watchword.”

Eventually, Galileo’s thought experiment was tested — on the moon, no less. A
feather and a hammer were dropped at the same time. And in the near vacuum,
the feather and the hammer hit the ground at the same time. So Galileo has
been experimentally confirmed. But I would say we already knew he was right.
Pure rational reflection can sometimes lead us to truths about the real world.

In a crucial way, we have an excess of information that further divorces
thought experiments from reality. While we have less information in thought
experiments than we do in the real world, in one big way we have more
information: we know a lot more about the consequences of our potential
actions. Many ethical thought experiments fall in an uncanny valley of too
much information and not enough information. Relevant context and detail is
eliminated, so there’s a lack of information that would irritate and confuse
anyone with expertise; and there’s too much information about the consequences
of our actions. (If we push this fat man, the five people will be saved; if we
continue to torture this boy, the city will continue thriving in prosperity.)
We have more information than we ordinarily would and less information than we
ordinarily would. The elimination of relevant information that we usually
possess and inclusion of information that we don’t ordinarily possess renders
many ethical thought experiments worse than useless.

In fact, thought experiments are essentially really bad fiction. If you’re
going to talk about fiction, talk about TV shows, movies, and books. They
don’t suffer from the problems raised to anything like the extent of the
terrible, contextless stories philosophers tell.

The best response to my case against ethical thought experiments is the work
of Peter Singer. Singer uses thought experiments in his work, and there’s one
in particular that seems to make an impression on everyone.

Runaway trolleys, violinists, utility monsters. In my view, ethical thought
experiments are rarely persuasive, clarifying, relevant, or decisive. They
also don’t seem to help those who are really in the trenches. How does musing
over a violinist help clinicians who are working in the very messy real world?
I mean, isn’t moral philosophy supposed to be a bit more relevant to our lives
than other areas of philosophy? I like to talk about consciousness. But I do
that for its own sake–it’s fun and interesting. I’m not under a delusion that
philosophy of mind has the same weight as deciding the legal status of
abortion. Here’s James Wilson, a critic of ethical thought experiments, on the
famous violinist thought experiment:

It should be noted that Peter Singer is the exception and not the rule. He’s
been uniquely successful among philosophers in producing moral philosophy that
affects positive change in the real world. Were I to make the case in favor of
ethical thought experiments, Singer’s work would be Exhibit A (and possibly
the only exhibit).

In thought experiments designed to probe our moral intuitions, we often find
ourselves in highly unusual circumstances, where those moral intuitions are
arguably useless. One might respond that thought experiments _are_ unusual in
that they’re simplified situations, but that’s okay. That sort of thing can
help illustrate general principles. I suppose that’s fine if your thought
experiment is something like, “Imagine a frictionless plane…” but for ethical
thought experiments…? I’m not against thought experiments in every area.
Probing our intuition can be useful and interesting, and it’s driven progress
in mathematics and science, as well as areas of philosophy outside ethics. But
probing our moral intuitions with a thought experiment is a bit different.

Let’s switch gears for a moment. Thought experiments have played a crucial
role in the development of mathematics, philosophy, and science. As
implausible as it may seem, reasoning _a priori_ , comfortably from our
armchairs, can actually teach us about the real world and even drive progress
in physical science. This makes perfect sense in the realm of mathematics, but
you might think, “Surely thought experiments aren’t enough when it comes to
the physical nature of things, how they’ll behave in the real world. We need
_actual_ experiments.” And you’d be right, generally speaking: you need to go
out and look at the world to figure out how it works. But I want to discuss
one thought experiment from Galileo that proves you don’t always have to. You
can use reason alone to draw interesting and true conclusions about the world.

And some will try to defend thought experiments, like the one of the tortured
boy in the dungeon. They’ll say, “Aha! It IS like the real world because of x,
y, and z.” They’re the prophet Nathan revealing to King David that the parable
was really about him. But then we’re just back to arguing over whether thought
experiment A is like real world situation B. It’s entirely possible to agree
on the thought experiment and still disagree in the real world situation,
since these are two different worlds.

This is one reason I take fiction to be a superior way to explore moral
philosophy than traditional thought experiments: there’s an inclusion of
history, context, and human detail such that the story is more easily
translated to our lives. The power of myth is greater than the power of
thought experiments.

The reason I say Singer’s work is the best counter argument is because he’s
effective: he’s actually succeeding in changing the minds and behavior of
those who listen to him. I think one reason it’s not like other thought
experiments is that it’s easy to see how it is analogous to our lives and very
hard to argue that it’s not, as uncomfortable the implications may be. Singer
has actually made the world a better place by reducing suffering, and he has
literally saved human lives as a direct result of presenting his pond thought
experiment. He and groups he works with have changed legislation in order to
improve living conditions for animals. Many have changed their lifestyles as a
direct result of his work, be it turning vegan or donating money they don’t
need in order to save human lives.

Moral philosophers tend to assume that thought experiments make ethical
choices clearer by abstracting them (i.e. eliminating all context and creating
a world that doesn’t exist), but those with relevant expertise tend to see
these abstracting moves as losses of clarity and morally relevant detail. All
real world problems emerge in a context. There’s always a history, and all the
subtleties that come along with it.

I suspect the resistance to speaking about current events or real scenarios is
that it’s harder to do so. It’s easier to create an imaginary world where
there are no real stakes, where we have more information about the
consequences of our actions than we actually would, and less information about
all that irritating context. I say that if you want to defend torture, talk
about actual instances of torture–not thought experiments about torture. If
you have to create a world that doesn’t exist to make your case, you don’t
have a case. And besides, I don’t care what I should do in a world that I
don’t live in. As James Wilson writes, “Overall, ethical thought experiments
are, at best, fallible ways of constructing simplified models that map rather
imperfectly onto the world as we experience it, and can distort as much as
they illuminate.” So should we give up on moral thought experiments? Not
necessarily. We could make use of them as long as we understand their
limitations (which, at least at this moment, do not seem to be widely
appreciated). There’s a sort of ‘only game in town’ argument to be made in
defense thought experiments. We’re working with a flawed tool, but what’s the
alternative? In moral philosophy, I would say it’s talking about the real
world and robust fiction.

Aristotle held that heavier objects would fall faster to the ground than
lighter objections. If he was right, the cannonball would hit the ground
before the musket ball. Galileo invites us to imagine that we tied the
cannonball and musket ball together and asks, “Would the new object fall
faster than the lone cannonball or slower?” Well, obviously it would fall
slower. If lighter objects fall slower, a lighter object tied to a heavier one
should bring down the speed. The musket ball will act as a parachute, holding
back the speed with which the cannonball is descending, so the two objects
together should fall slower. But hang on — when we tie the two objects
together, we’ve made a bigger, heavier object. The two tied together are
heavier than the cannonball alone — it’s cannonball + musket ball. And if
heavier objects fall faster than lighter objects, the two tied together should
fall faster than the cannonball by itself. So the musket ball, falling at a
slower rate, should drag down the speed the cannonball is falling. And the two
objects tied together are heavier than the cannonball, meaning it should fall
faster. So if we take Aristotle’s theory seriously, the two objects tied
together would fall both slower and faster than cannonball falling alone. His
theory, that heavier and lighter objects fall at different rates, leads to a
contradiction. So what conclusion do we draw? Heavier and lighter objects fall
at the same rate. That seems counterintuitive, but it must be the case that
lighter and heavier objects fall at the same rate, since Aristotle’s view
leads to a contradiction.

Maybe I’m confused. I, perhaps naively, thought the aim of applied ethical
philosophy was to figure out how to behave. You know — in real life. In this
universe that we live in. So creating a scenario that would literally never
occur in real life — i.e. a vast number ethical thought experiments — is a
pointless exercise.

Additionally, there are some thought experiments that are so divorced from
reality that it’s hard to begin to list the problems with them. Once, I was
arguing with an antinatalist, and I pointed out that in addition to pain,
there’s this other thing called pleasure, a concept that appears to be foreign
to many antinatalists. Life seems to be worth living to most of us, even
though pain is terrible. There are good parts to life that seem to make it
worth living. His response was the following thought experiment. Imagine you
were subjected to the worst pain imaginable for an hour, but that you’d enjoy
the greatest pleasure imaginable for an hour afterwards. Would you take the
deal? I explained that I was suspicious of thought experiments like this, that
I was convinced they confused more than they clarified, and that scenarios
like his seem too disanalogous to possibly be relevant. I asked if we could
keep our discussion to the real world. He declined to continue speaking with
me. Keep in mind, we were talking about whether or not we should _continue the
human species_. We were discussing whether or not it’s okay to have children.
If you say to me it’s immoral to have children, and I ask why, and you say,
“Imagine someone offered to subject you to torture for an hour, but immense
pleasure for an hour,” who should be losing patience with whom? Given the
radical conclusion being drawn, the relevance of the thought experiment is
pretty important. And imagine if I had engaged. We’d still be going back and
forth an hour later, adding and subtracting detail, talking past each other
endlessly.

During a speech at the National Prayer Breakfast, Mother Teresa claimed that
“the greatest destroyer of peace today is abortion.” Whatever you may think
about abortion, no one can honestly assert that it’s _the_ obstacle to world
peace. Campaigning in Ireland, she said, “Let us promise … that we will never
allow in this country a single abortion,” before adding, “and no
contraceptives,” to smattering applause from a confused crowd.

It’s entirely possible that the public doesn’t want to be disillusioned. Some
have speculated that her mythos soothes our first-world guilt. “The rich world
has a poor conscience,” Hitchens observed. “It wants, in fact, it needs, to
think that someone, somewhere, is doing something about the third world, and
the Mother Teresa myth ministers to this desire.” The press, with few
exceptions, is highly complicit in the perpetuation of her reputation. An
article from the Washington Post used the phrase “frugality and simplicity” to
describe the reuse, without sterilization, of hypodermic needles and
facilities that required patients to defecate in front of one another.

Mother Teresa Said to Gain After Receiving a Pacemaker. New York Times. 1989.

Dr. Aroup Chatterjee, having worked under Mother Teresa, was baffled and
frustrated upon moving to the United Kingdom in 1985 when he discovered the
saintly reputation she had acquired in the West. Dr. Chatterjee conducted
hundreds of hours of interviews with nuns and volunteers, discovering that
Mother Teresa’s practices were even worse than he had witnessed during his
tenure. Despite her clinics receiving millions of dollars in donations, their
conditions were appalling. Needles were routinely reused with no
sterilization. There was a disturbing lack of actual medical care and basic
nutrition, as well as a seemingly intentional lack of painkillers. Many of her
victim-residents laid in agony in hammocks or stretcher beds, many with shaved
heads. According to Chatterjee, friends and family members were often
prohibited from visiting the afflicted residents, which is highly unusual.
Blankets stained with feces were washed in the same sink used to clean dishes,
and residents were forced to defecate in the presence of one another.

Taylor, Adam. “Why Mother Teresa is still no saint to many of her critics.”
The Washington Post, 2016.

This fact was certainly not lost on many Indians. Chatterjee described Mother
Teresa’s missionary work as “an imperialist venture of the Catholic Church
against an Eastern population.” Mohan Bhagwat, chief of a major Indian
political party, said in a speech that “Mother Teresa’s work had ulterior
motives, which were to convert the person who was being served to
Christianity.” According to Fr. Leo Maasburg, one of Mother Teresa’s many
sycophants, she would often baptize Hindu patients without their consent or
understanding. Again, this is according to one of her _supporters_.

In the year of our Lord 2022, Mother Teresa is somehow still seen as a person
who rose to the level of even a morally average person. A few years ago, we
discussed her unearned reputation on[ Counter
Apologetics](https://open.spotify.com/show/0xp05xgyg04BWh0U1tCZ0z?si=pOezmB_7QtGJNf8C_kGw0w&nd=1).
I wrote an updated version of the episode in 2019, and repost it here today to
remind you that if you’ve never supported a brutal Haitian dictatorship,
participated in “one of the most heartless and cruel frauds in modern memory,”
or campaigned to make divorce illegal, you’re a better person than Mother
Teresa.

Kodak manufactured film that worked in the dark, and a superstitious director,
unaware of this, attributed something he couldn’t explain to the divine. The
news of the first television miracle spread like wildfire. From there, Mother
Teresa’s media appearances increased. For the last few decades of her life,
you could find her touring the world in private jets and helicopters,
appearing with TV stars and powerful figures, basking in the spotlight and
raking in donations that never went to the poor.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F03%2F27%2Fthe-mother-teresa-myth%2F&signup_flow=account)

In addition to Mother Teresa’s charitable work described thus far, she was
also a tireless opponent of women’s rights. She campaigned to keep divorce
illegal in Ireland, while simultaneously congratulating Princess Diana on her
divorce, publicly offering her well wishes. Apparently, a poor woman in
Ireland with a wife-beating husband can never hope for anything better. But a
wealthy, famous woman can divorce and receive Mother Teresa’s stamp of
approval. Thankfully, Mother Teresa failed in her efforts to force Catholic
morals on the entire population through the state, and now, women are legally
allowed to leave abusive relationships because she did not succeed.

Mother Teresa kept dubious political contacts, to put it mildly. She praised
the Duvalier dictatorship in Haiti, a notoriously bloody and corrupt regime.
Under their decades-long rule, tens of thousands of Haitians were tortured and
killed, while hundreds of thousands fled and became refugees. At the time,
Haiti suffered the most crippling poverty in the Western Hemisphere, while the
Duvaliers maintained an opulent and lavish lifestyle at the expense of the
Haitian population under their rule. In 1980, in the midst of their brutal
dictatorship, Saint Teresa flew to Haiti and accepted a medal from President
Duvalier. She told bewildered reporters that she had “never seen the poor
people being so familiar with their head of state as they were with the
Duvaliers. […] It was a beautiful lesson for me. I’ve learned something from
it.”

This kind of bewilderingly slanted press coverage of Mother Teresa is
customary, and if you dare challenge it, prepare to be met with fury and wrath
from all quarters, as Hitchens and Dr. Chatterjee were. It simply does not
matter what she says or what is reported – no one’s opinion of her seems to
respond. Her sycophants will remain unfazed. Mother Teresa was once – and
still is, to a large extent – an unassailable figure. Her few public critics
were rewarded for their honesty and integrity with venomous public outrage.
Hitchens and Dr. Chatterjee’s early work did not earn them many friends.
However, over time, their account of Mother Teresa has survived the intense
scrutiny put upon it, and the weight of evidence continues to grow on the side
of those who see Mother Teresa for what she really was: a sadist and fraud.

Another reason it’s difficult to break the spell is that the Catholic Church,
one the richest and most powerful organizations in human history, prefers it
to remain unbroken. Saint Teresa was an excellent public relations figure for
the church, something they’re desperate for in the midst of a decades-long,
ongoing barrage of child rape scandals.

Tagged [aroup chatterjee](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aroup-
chatterjee/), [atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[catholic](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/catholic/),
[Catholicism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/catholicism/),
[chatterjee](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/chatterjee/),
[christopher hitchens](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christopher-
hitchens/),
[donations](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/donations/),
[Duvalier](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/duvalier/), [Duvalier
dictatorship](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/duvalier-
dictatorship/), [fraud](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fraud/),
[friend of poverty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/friend-of-
poverty/), [hitchens](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/hitchens/),
[keating](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/keating/), [medical
donations](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/medical-donations/),
[mother teresa](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-teresa/),
[mother teresa fraud](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-
teresa-fraud/), [mother teresa
myth](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-teresa-myth/), [mother
teresa sadist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-teresa-
sadist/),
[Muggeridge](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/muggeridge/),
[saint](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/saint/), [saint
teresa](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/saint-teresa/), [Serge
Larivée](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/serge-larivee/)

Mother Teresa is a cultural symbol of compassion and love for the poor. If you
read almost anything written about her, she’s presented as the embodiment of
sacrifice and humility, a beacon of inspiration to the rest of humanity.
Mother Teresa, according to historian Ruth Tucker, was the first religious
figure in history to be revered during her lifetime by Christians of all
denominations. If we decide, however, to examine the facts of Mother Teresa’s
life without the customary awe and reverence, we may see an entirely different
figure. In reality, the mainstream portrait of Mother Teresa is entirely at
odds with her actions and her own words. Saint Teresa of Calcutta, without
exaggeration, was a masochistic fraud whose work greatly increased the amount
of suffering in the world. Per her own words, she had no interest in
alleviating poverty or suffering. She took millions of dollars in donations,
managed it suspiciously, and did not spend it on the poor. She worked to
repair the reputations of political tyrants and increase her own fame. She was
dogmatically opposed to divorce, abortion, and the use of contraceptives, even
in the densely overpopulated country of India. If you were under the illusion
that she was a virtuous woman who dedicated her life to apolitical
humanitarian work, and that we should all venerate her regardless of our
religious views, I hope you can be disabused of the Myth of Mother Teresa.

Though she often denied basic medical treatment to those under her care, she
never spared any expense for her own health. For example, she received the
best western medicine and treatment available for her heart problems.

“Give a man a reputation as an early riser, and he can sleep ’til noon,” said
Mark Twain. Mother Teresa’s persona eclipsed anything that even she could say.
No matter what she did, no matter what she herself said in no matter how
mainstream a publication, nearly everyone – including the reporters themselves
– continued to perceive her as the glowing moral icon most know her to be. The
tone of the coverage of Mother Teresa never diverged far from Muggeridge’s
original portrayal of her. This worshipful handling, combined with her
skillful knack for self-promotion and hunger for fame snowballed into the
reputation she retains to this day.

Dr. Chatterjee wrote that Mother Teresa had an “obsession with suffering.” She
believed that “Suffering [is] a gift from God,” and once quipped, “There is
something beautiful in seeing the poor accept their lot, to suffer it like
Christ’s Passion. The world gains much from their suffering.” She never
claimed to want to alleviate poverty or suffering, and she said as much
whenever anyone bothered to ask. As journalist Christopher Hitchens memorably
put it, “She was not a friend of the poor; she was a friend of poverty.” Of
course, she did want to work with the poor and said so on many occasions.
Decent people interpret such a sentiment to mean interest in reducing poverty,
but not Mother Teresa.

Schultz, Kai. “A Critic’s Lonely Quest: Revealing the Whole Truth About Mother
Teresa.” New York Times, 2016.

Saint Teresa of Calcutta was born Anjezë Bojaxhiu (pronounced Agnus Boy-ah-
chew). She chose the name Teresa for herself, in honor of the patron saint of
missionaries, Thérèse de Lisieux. Missionary work was her true passion. She
used the millions of dollars in donations she received to build nunneries in
order to train more missionaries. Rather than use the millions at her disposal
to alleviate suffering and poverty, she spent most of her money on Catholic
missionary work. According to Serge Larivée, a researcher at the University of
Montreal, Mother Teresa only offered prayers and medallions of the Virgin Mary
to victims of natural disasters rather than any aid, monetary or otherwise.

Mother Teresa accepted millions of dollars from Charles Keating, the savings-
and-loan fraud who made his money by stealing from the elderly. Over twenty
thousand people lost large sums of money as a result of Keating’s scams. A
significant portion of the victims lost their entire life savings, many of
them senior citizens. In return for the millions of dollars Mother Teresa
received from Keating (as well as the use of his private jet), Mother Teresa
gave him a trinket that she had “blessed”. When Keating’s fraud was exposed,
the courts asked her to return the money to whom it had been stolen. She
declined. Her letter, preserved by the California court to whom it was
addressed, read that she did not know anything about Keating’s fraud. She
said, “I only know that he has always been kind and generous to God’s poor,
and always ready to help whenever there was a need.” L. Seidman, the FDIC
chair at the time, later wrote that Keating’s scam was “one of the most
heartless and cruel frauds in modern memory.”

Barton, Adriana. “Mother Teresa was ‘anything but a Saint,’ Canadian study
says.” The Globe and Mail. 2013.

If she had no interest in aiding the poor, alleviating suffering, helping
women, or anything beyond fame and missionary work, how was the Mother Teresa
myth generated to begin with? Her first taste of the media spotlight came in
the form of a 1969 BBC program entitled Something Beautiful for God, directed
by Malcolm Muggeridge. The film and subsequent book portrayed Mother Teresa in
the way we’ve all come to expect – a humble, solemn servant of God and the
poor.

Hitchens wrote one of the only critical books on Mother Teresa in existence
(according to Larivée, it’s one of about a half dozen). Hitchens had the
opportunity to speak to Mother Teresa personally and offered his criticism of
some of her practices. He reported, “It was by talking to her that I
discovered, and she assured me, that she wasn’t working to alleviate poverty.
She was working to expand the number of Catholics. She said, ‘I’m not a social
worker, I don’t do it for this reason. I do it for Christ, I do it for the
church.’” So don’t take my word for it, take _her_ word for it. She’s not
doing social work; she’s only trying to convert more Catholics.

These are not the words of an apolitical humanitarian. Keep in mind she worked
in India, one of the most overpopulated regions on earth. This overpopulation
greatly contributed to the appalling poverty in India, which, of course, she
had no interest in alleviating. Her message of “no contraceptives”
accomplished nothing other than to increase the amount of suffering and
poverty in the world, as well as to prevent women from controlling their own
reproduction. This was one of her primary goals. She devoted much of her time
not to aiding the poor, but rather to campaigning against abortion and
contraceptives. Hitchens wrote, “She spent her life opposing the only known
cure for poverty, which is the empowerment of women and the emancipation of
them from a livestock version of compulsory reproduction.”

Muggeridge also propagated a dubious miracle story from the filming of the BBC
documentary that helped create the divine aura her credulous admirers
perceive. A crewmember recounting the story of the alleged miracle reported:
“There was an episode where we were taken to a building that Mother Teresa
called the House of the Dying, and [the director] said ‘Well, it’s very dark
in here. Do you think we can get anything?’” The crew had just received
special film, made by Kodak, which they hadn’t had time to test before they
left. They filmed in the darkened rooms with the new film, and it worked as it
was intended. They crewman recalled, “I said, ‘That’s amazing! That’s
extraordinary!’ And I was going to say, you know, three cheers for Kodak. I
didn’t get a chance to say that, because [Muggeridge] spun around and said,
‘It’s divine light! It’s Mother Teresa! You’ll find that it’s divine light,
old boy!’ And three or four days later, I was being phoned by journalists from
London newspapers who were saying things like, ‘We hear that you’ve just come
back from India with Malcolm Muggeridge and you were the witness of a
miracle.’”

Finding aesthetic value apart from political and moral ideology, however, is a
necessary skill. If we don’t nurture this ability, what will be left? How many
artists live up to your moral and political standards? And why would one
deprive oneself in this way?

> “Industry should be socialised by degrees, & only as soon as the mass of the
> people are ready to back up the various absorptive moves. The government
> must dictate hours & wages, & see that employment is universally spread. If
> private industry can meet such rigidly enforced demands, well & good. If
> not—& it probably can’t—absorption will be in order.”

So why bother talking about the nuances of Lovecraft’s character, and even
defending him, if I’m arguing that it ultimately doesn’t matter? Well, first
off, to ask a fan of Lovecraft why they’d be interested in minutia surrounding
the artist’s life and work is to utterly fail to understand fans of Lovecraft
and their affliction. Second, I think it vindicates a few of us, like Oswalt,
who had supposed that we had detected some redeeming qualities in him. Though,
let me concede once again that it ultimately doesn’t matter: his improved
character doesn’t make me enjoy his work any more or less. Nonetheless, it is
an interesting turn of events for Lovecraft readers and fans. It’s certainly a
chapter of his life that many don’t seem to know about. That his politics in
his later years before he died at age 46 were so radically different from
those of the younger man who most consider to _be_ Lovecraft is an interesting
biographical item in itself.

He’s in favor of gradual socialization rather than violent revolution, and he
pokes fun at Marxists (who hasn’t?).

Here is where I and those who have disagreed with me thus far can at least
find some common ground. This is our situation: we cannot fully separate art
from artist, in some sense. Nor should we. Those who make movies and books and
shows we love will always be of some interest to us, as will their intent.
(It’s an ironic fact that many conservatives who think authorial intent is
paramount also emphatically demand that we separate art from artist.) In any
event, we must separate our moral judgement from our aesthetic judgement. Why
should artists be role models? And why should every _character_ be a role
model? This carving must be further applied to the behavior of those in the
book, movie, show, etc. “Protagonist” doesn’t mean “good guy, who you’re
supposed to side with, who does good things for good reasons.” (Though it does
in Christian movies and Ayn Rand novels.) Moral condemnation of the behavior
of characters in a work of fiction shouldn’t translate to aesthetic
condemnation. Many of those who seem to want every movie to be a Christian
movie or an Ayn Rand novel inserted with different values are utterly unable
to see anything on screen endorsed or depicted that they find morally
objectionable. If we can’t find a way to outgrow this stupidity…well, I hope
you like Christian movies.

Nothing like a bit of biological essentialism to let you know the old
Lovecraft is still there somewhere. Though it should be noted that he goes on
to disparage the KKK as “backward fundamentalists”.

Make no mistake, it’s not as if he became a man of the people, and he
certainly did not have any sympathy for the Soviet Union. (Though, neither did
Emma Goldman or Noam Chomsky, both socialists.) This 1934 letter to Barlow
isn’t quite as stark as his 1937 letter to Moore, and the hostility of Barlow
to socialism of any kind had him seeming almost apologetic.

Lovecraft goes on a long rant in [his letter to
Moore](https://github.com/punchmonster/Lovecraft-
Letters/blob/master/19370207-Catherine-L-Moore.md) about the corrosive effects
of the profit motive on art. Though he was never able to make a decent living
on his fiction (he was the quintessential starving artist), he mentions in a
letter that lack of decent pay would ward off the “mercenaries,” and only
leave the true lovers of the “weird” remaining.

Occasionally, his fans will step out on a limb, defending aspects of his
character. [Patton Oswalt once suggested](https://youtu.be/t2DPGROfCsQ?t=2392)
that Lovecraft, had he been given the chance to grow old, may have matured in
his old age. Perhaps he would’ve become an even worse crank, but there’s a
chance he would’ve swerved in the other direction—his introspective and hyper-
critical nature would cause personal evolution eventually.

According to Lovecraft, the blame for the deteriorating influence of
“commercialism” on the human psyche and the quality of art cannot be solely
attributed to the impulses of a few bad apples. The “greed-breeding
capitalistic order” will never fail to generate and reward those actors, so,
they will continue to “work the poor devils as cheaply as possible (throwing
’em out to starve when they’re superfluous), & cash in on their present
dwarfed tastes & faculties…”

Perhaps he saw clearly what was to come. In the endless barrage of superhero
movies, lowest-common-denominator entertainment, and the death of mid-budget
movies, Lovecraft’s rants seem prophetic. “Bourgeois capitalism gave artistic
excellence & sincerity a deathblow,” he wrote, “by enthroning cheap amusement-
value at the expense of that intrinsic excellence…”

Lovecraft’s objection to capitalism was not just economic, but moral and
aesthetic. He saw the conflict between artistic excellence and a capitalistic
order, and he argued that the privately-controlled, free market economy would
turn us into the worst versions of ourselves.

Personally, I don’t want to live in a world where every movie is a Christian
movie, and every moviegoer is an old church lady. I don’t think every work of
art is supposed to be a moral or ideological vehicle whose purpose is to
effect positive change. Though this would be an augmentation of every awful
trend that we’ve witnessed over the past decade, it seems to be the implicit
desire of many, if not the explicit goal.

I think we must try to learn to separate aesthetic value from moral or
political value. If we don’t learn to separate artistic quality and moral
quality, the results will be predictable. Every movie will become a secular
version of a Christian movie—all the masterful filmmaking skill we see on
display in Christian movies, just promoting different values. Every analysis
will be that of a secular church lady who says, “This was good because it
affirms my moral beliefs, but that was bad because it doesn’t affirm my moral
beliefs.” “Because that author was racist, his fiction sucks.” “Because that
comedian did something bad, he’s no longer funny.” “Because this movie depicts
something morally impermissible, it’s a terrible movie.” “Because someone used
bad words, this is a bad work of art—doesn’t matter if it was the creator or a
character in the story.” I’ve even heard, “This comedy special isn’t any good
because it doesn’t help advance positive social change.”

> “Actually, there are many persons of the highest character & most impeccable
> background who honestly think that a general communistic programme forms the
> only ultimate solution of the present breakdown of capitalism—a belief which
> they derive from the abstract & impersonal study of national resources &
> their distribution; & which does not, of course, necessarily involve any
> endorsement of the sudden social changes & absurd formal *ideologies*
> advocated by the orthodox Marxians & discontented European riffraff. Such
> persons do not wish to see all traditions & settled ways of living ripped up
> indiscriminately, but they do feel that mankind will not be able to continue
> its civilisation unless its stagnating inequalities of resources &
> opportunities are eventually diminished through some far-sighted plan of
> distribution & some adequate way of enforcing that plan. To them, some sort
> of communism (in each case suited to the history & traditions of the race
> involved) seems the only way to enforce a civilization-preserving economic
> plan—hence they believe it will have to come in the end … The number of
> these honest & analytical communists or semi-communists seems vastly on the
> increase…”

The politics of H.P. Lovecraft (1890-1937) have always been considered a
liability by those who appreciate his body of work. So, upon reading a few of
his letters from the final seven years of his life, I was surprised by what I
discovered. Lovecraft’s radical political transformation in 1931, so at odds
with the man that many know as H.P. Lovecraft, is a chapter of the writer’s
life even many aficionados seem to be unfamiliar with.

> “And when bourgeois capitalism found it profitable to reach down to the
> still-submerged elements & cater to their crippled, repressed, & grotesquely
> unformed tastes … this huge market merely aggravated the trend away from
> real excellence towards showmanship & charlatanry. The suave bosses of a
> business ‘civilisation’ have no wish to improve the masses—rather the
> reverse.”

> “Capitalism is dying from internal as well as external causes, & its own
> leaders & beneficiaries are less & less able to kid themselves. I’m no
> economist, but from recent reading I’ve been able to form a rough picture of
> the dilemma—the need to restrict consumers’ goods & to pile up a needless
> plethora of producing equipment in order to maintain the irrational surplus
> called profit—which has caused orthodox economists like Hayek & Robbins to
> admit that only starvation wages & artificial scarcity could stabilize the
> profit system in future & avert increasing cyclical depressions of utterly
> destructive scope. Laissez-faire capitalism is dead—make no mistake about
> that. The only avenue of survival for plutocracy is a military & emotional
> fascism whereby millions of persons will be withdrawn from the industrial
> arena & placed on a dole or in concentration-camps with high-sounding
> patriotic names. That or socialism—take your choice. … All this from an
> antiquated mummy who was on the other side until 1931! Well—I can better
> understand the inert blindness & defiant ignorance of the reactionaries from
> having been one of them. I know how smugly ignorant I was…”

Like other Lovecraft fans, I’ve tried to learn to separate aesthetic value
from moral value. Lovecraft was a reactionary and a white supremacist. This
can be detected in his work—sometimes it’s subtle, sometimes it’s staring you
right in the face. Nevertheless, he’s a literary genius and one of the
greatest horror authors of all time.

Though he never explicitly renounces his racist views (at least, not anywhere
that I’ve found), they seem to be part of the reactionary package that he does
reject by name. In his letters, his prolific usage of racial slurs tapirs off,
and his expressions of racist ideas fade from sight. You’ll find that his most
reactionary writings were produced in the 1910’s and the ‘20s. That period of
his life is the man that most people simply know as Lovecraft. But in the
1930s, the rougher edges appear to have been sanded off. I don’t want to
overstate his evolution, but many of his reactionary views did not seem to
follow him into the ‘30s.

> “The war between honest human expression & the profit motive is eternal &
> truceless.”

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F10%2F18%2Fh-p-lovecrafts-1931-radical-political-transformation%2F&signup_flow=account)

> “I can’t see that socialism would hurt anybody who is willing to work & who
> expects a just return from the work he performs—including guarantees of
> proper security in old age & in times of necessary unemployment or
> disability.”

> “A few can reason, & can see that capitalism is automatically doomed by the
> natural course of economics unless upheld by fascist bayonets.”

> “The nations of Scandinavia form a very hopeful sign—for there the
> plutocrats are gradually backing down under the combined pressure of
> increased government supervision & the competing system of consumers’
> coöperatives. England is also well on the way. The United States has the
> handicap of a lawless pioneer tradition which exalts in individual gain to a
> grotesque extent—but even here the Northern-European temperament has
> softened the savagery of reaction.”

In these letters from the last several years of his life, his notorious racism
seems to fade, and he explicitly rejects the reactionary, fascistic political
ideology he held prior to 1931. He ruthlessly critiques capitalism, speaks
glowingly of Marx, and warns us that our only options are socialism or
barbarism.

Based on these late-period letters I’ve been reading, Oswalt may have been on
to something. Lovecraft explicitly repudiated fascism, renouncing many of his
reactionary political views following a dramatic political transformation
beginning in the 1930s. To my surprise, he turned against capitalism. In fact,
if you can believe it, he was an ardent socialist by the time he died.

Can we form an absolute division between art and artist? Probably not, and
certainly not in the case of Lovecraft. _Who he is_ matters. His own fragile,
paranoid, and diseased mental state shades the mental states of his victim-
protagonists, the character of his mythos, and the narrative arcs of his
stories. At least in some sense, “separating the art from the artist” is not
even desirable. (For more details regarding his inner life, see [the section
on Lovecraft’s biography.](https://youtu.be/t2DPGROfCsQ?t=459) He seemed
socially stunted, and suffered from a unique set of anxieties and various
abnormalities.)

His harshest words in this letter are for capitalism, which he describes as a
“crazy orgy” of “legalised” corruption. Under capitalism, he writes, “the
chief corruption is actually legalised under the name of private profit”.

One passage of the letter to Moore echoes Rosa Luxemburg’s famous “socialism
or barbarism” slogan:

Fair warning, those who would like to be spared culture war ranting should
skip to the next section where we get to the letters. This is relevant to
Lovecraft, for reasons that will become obvious, if they aren’t already. In my
first episode about Lovecraft, originally published a couple years back, I
briefly complained about a terrible shift in our cultural ethos, and I’ll be
expanding on those thoughts a bit. So, those who are just reading to hear
Lovecraft’s recently uncovered letters…you might just skip this next part. The
bottom line is that you can adore an artist’s work without it being diminished
by moral or ideological concerns. And further, that this is in every sense a
much better ethos than what currently is the norm, set by the secular
counterparts of church ladies.

> “I read the old *Communist Manifesto* many years ago; & even though then
> wholly out of sympathy with it, was impressed by some of the isolated points
> it brought out. Today I would sympathise on more counts—but even so, would
> not give it a 100% endorsement. There is no question of the vast
> intelligence & far-sightedness of Marx & Engels, & of the basic importance
> of the large economic principles they discovered & formulated. The only
> mistake is to think that every ramification they developed, & every
> inference they drew, is infallibly accurate & worthy of slavishly literal
> following under every conceivable set of circumstances. The major discovery
> as to general drift is sound … Some people seem never able to realise that
> no great discovery comes forth without attendant clouds of error & half
> truth.”

Recently I learned that H.P. Lovecraft had undergone a surprising and dramatic
political transformation in the final years of his brief life. I wanted to
read a few of Lovecraft’s letters and discuss his views on capitalism,
socialism, & the influence of the profit motive on artistic expression.

I drew from three of his correspondences: one in 1934, 1936, and 1937. The
1937 letter, written to Catherine Moore, is the one in which his socialism is
most strident, least apologetic, and most consistent. (Whereas, in his 1934
letter, for instance, his political ideology seems muddled and incoherent.)
Were you to only read one of his letters, his 1937 letter, written in the year
of his death, is the one.

This [letter to Catherine Moore](https://github.com/punchmonster/Lovecraft-
Letters/blob/master/19370207-Catherine-L-Moore.md), written in the final year
of his life, is an incredible document for a fan of Lovecraft. To hear him
rail against “plutocracy” and capitalism is quite interesting, not to mention
his explicit repudiation of his younger self, which most of his fans conceive
to _be Lovecraft._

> “The only avenue of survival for plutocracy is a military & emotional
> fascism whereby millions of persons will be withdrawn from the industrial
> arena & placed on a dole or in concentration-camps with high-sounding
> patriotic names. That or socialism—take your choice.”

> (1) Pr(meager moral fruits | Naturalism) = n
>
> (2) Pr(meager moral fruits | Christian Theism) = <n
>
> (3) Therefore, Pr(meager moral fruits | Naturalism) > Pr(meager moral fruits
> | Christian Theism)
>
> (4) Therefore, meager moral fruits constitute evidence favoring Naturalism
> over Theism.

My favorite version of the MMF argument begins with the claim that, if true,
Christianity should not be an obstacle to the pursuit of the good for oneself
and for others. It should be a help, not a hindrance. The judgment of which it
is – aid or obstacle – will be person-dependent, based on the evidence they
have available to them. It’s inevitable that everyone listening to this –
regardless of your religious persuasion – will have to make moral and
empirical judgments based on your unique position on the grand epistemic
landscape. And it’s you, as an individual, who has to make the decision to be
a part of Christianity or not.

Putting those three together, one has a version of the meager moral fruits
argument. We could switch out any of those three claims, substituting
different versions of the theological premise or focusing on different
empirical claims or moral issues.

The data that we’re trying to explain – the meager moral fruits in question –
can be hard to pin down. As is often the case in philosophy, the argument is
really a family of arguments. So, the specific meager moral fruits may shift
from argument to argument, just as the specific form of evil shifts when
discussing the various arguments from evil. A given meager moral fruits
argument may invoke the fact that Christian practice is often an obstacle to
pursuing the good for oneself and others. Its focus may be Christian history,
objectionable moral doctrines, social policies, and political influence of
Christian institutions. What you’d like to focus on is a matter of choice.

The moral premise is, by my lights, where the most trouble is liable to occur.
I think the theological claim, properly stated, is the least controversial.
The empirical claim can cause difficulty as well, depending on what sort of
empirical claim you’re making. But I think the biggest potential difficulty
lies with the moral premise.

The theological premise – the foundation of the MMF argument – is usually
pretty defensible. ([Here, Trent Horn doesn’t even try to reject the
theological premise – he instead pushes back on the empirical and moral
premises](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w1Tp7gDzevk).) Its support is found
in scripture and tradition and common sense. There’s a clear basis for
believing that the moral conduct of Christians and non-Christians should not
be indistinguishable. That would be an example of a potential theological
premise. Another candidate would be “Theism should be an aid, not an obstacle
to the pursuit of the good for oneself and for others.” Christianity should
not impair your ability to live a moral life. If Christianity is true, we
should expect it to have the opposite effect. Couple that with an empirical
claim like “Christians have by and large been an obstacle to equality for the
LGBT community” and a moral claim like “Equality for the LGBT community would
be a moral good” and you’ve got an argument from meager moral fruits.
Incidentally, one that has had a dramatic effect over millennials and gen-z.
(I lean on the example of LGBT equality for the sake of ease: we have a solid
moral _and_ empirical premise. Yet many Christians remain content to position
themselves against LGBT social and legal equality – they’re proud to be wrong
about this.)

Here, it comes down to how confident one is in a given moral issue. Some
values are uncontroversial, such as generosity, kindness, and not punching
babies. But these widely-accepted morals create unique empirical problems. How
could we know which religious demographics are…kinder? And we don’t collect
data on baby-punching. We have plenty of data on a range of social and moral
issues – on LGBT equality, for example. On that subject, the empirical premise
is solid. The moral premise will receive pushback, but there’s no question
that Christianity was (and still is) an obstacle to LGBT equality. So to
whatever extent you’re confident that LGBT equality would be a good thing,
that’s the confidence with which you can issue that version of the MMF
argument.

**The Moral Premise** affirms a moral fact or normative judgment. (For
example, “LGBT equality would be a moral good.”)

Why is it the case that the data we’re trying to explain are more expected on
naturalism and more surprising on Christian theism? It comes down to the
theological premise – the question of whether Christianity is supposed to bear
moral fruits. The theological premise is built into Christian theism, but
obviously not into naturalism. On naturalism, we would expect religion, like
all other man-made institutions, to be sometimes a help in the pursuit of the
good, sometimes a hindrance. Many of those who have left the Christian faith
have done so because Christianity was not enabling them to pursue the good for
themselves or others. Of course, this is quite surprising on Christianity.
(Are we really going to assert that Christianity being _an obstacle to
pursuing the good_ is not in dramatic conflict with the self-image of
Christianity?) Naturalists, on the other hand, have good reason to expect a
mixed bag. Like all other human institutions, we’d expect Christianity to be
sometimes an aid, sometimes an obstacle to the pursuit of the good for oneself
and others. Since this is what we observe, we can take this fact to be
evidence favoring naturalism over Christian theism.

The late Ravi Zacharias said that the question that haunted him the most
throughout his ministry was presented by a Hindu acquaintance: “If this
conversion you speak about is truly supernatural, then why is it not more
evident in the lives of so many Christians that I know?” In other words, a God
who is said to transform should produce followers with transformed lives.
Naturalism leads one to form less lofty expectations.

> “I might believe in the Redeemer if his followers looked more redeemed.”
>
> Nietzsche

We would never expect the moral fruits of theism to be meager at best, given
the dramatic claims that apologists often make about the connection between
Christianity and goodness itself. To be sure, some degree of moral failure and
meager fruit is easily accounted for by the Christian worldview. But for
doctrinal reasons, scriptural reasons, and to some extent, common sense,
Christianity is not limitlessly flexible in accounting for its meager moral
fruits. If it was, it would make no strong predictions about the
transformative power of Christ, the fruits of the Spirit, and the connection
between Christianity and the good itself. Christianity does make such claims,
which is why meager moral fruits are better explained by naturalism.

  1. Pingback: [CA92 The Meager Moral Fruits Argument | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/03/28/ca92-the-meager-moral-fruits-argument/)

No defender of [the meager moral fruits (MMF)
argument](https://youtu.be/q5Kq-73HfWk) takes it to decisively refute the
truth of Christian theism, since there is no logical incompatibility between
meager moral fruits and the truth of Christianity. Rather, it’s _evidence
against_ Christianity; it _lowers the probability_ of Christianity. It’s an
argument that’s best utilized in a cumulative case. There’s also a
pragmatic/existential argument from meager moral fruits, and a hortatory
version of the argument (intended to inspire action), but we’ll leave those to
one side for now.

Does Christianity bear the kind of fruit one might expect if it were true?
Does naturalism or Christian theism better predict the moral fruits and lack
thereof that we actually observe? Naturalists would expect Christianity to
produce a mixed bag, like any other man-made institution. Christianity leads
one to form loftier expectations.

According to the [Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2017/11/27/views-of-transgender-issues-divide-along-religious-lines/),
views of transgender issues (unsurprisingly) divide along religious lines.
(There was and still is a similar divide over gay rights.) Atheists are not
just one of the most progressive demographics on trans issues; we’re _the_
most progressive demographic. If one considers support for LGBT equality to be
a moral good, then the MMF applies in full force. If one considers LGBT people
to be in a state of terrible sin, then the comparative lack of religious
support isn’t a moral failing – exactly the opposite. Disagreement over what
is or isn’t morally good complicates the MMF argument – running it will be
much easier if the disagreement is resolved first. …which means that many
presentations of the MMF argument will end up mired in debates over ethical
and political issues.

Christianity may have resources for explaining its lack of fruit, but
establishing that there is no logical incompatibility here (as theists are
capable of doing) is not the same thing as making the respective probabilities
equal. This point is worth repeating: explaining some observation without
logical contradiction is not a very high bar. Clearing it certainly does not
mean that our observations are equiprobable on naturalism and on theism.
Everyone involved can offer a coherent explanation of our observations, but
that doesn’t mean the evidence doesn’t favor one hypothesis over another.

Christianity is not endlessly flexible when accounting for meager moral
fruits. Christianity doesn’t predict that Christians would be _perfect_ (no
one is saying that it does), but it definitely does not predict that
Christians would be morally indistinguishable from non-Christians, let alone
worse. Believers claim that the power of Jesus is transformative, that the
Spirit yields different actions than the flesh. Some even claim that atheists
cannot be moral. Well, if that’s the case, then there ought to be pretty
noticeable moral fruits! As Steve Baughman put it, “This is one of the few
testable claims Christianity makes. If being a ‘new creature’ in Christ means
anything, it means being significantly different from us old creatures.”

There’s much more to say about this argument than we cover today, but we
manage to lay out the essential core of the argument: the Theological Premise,
the Empirical Premise, and the Moral Premise. The Theological Premise is,
roughly speaking, the claim that Christianity should bear appreciable moral
fruit, and that Christian theism and naturalism make different predictions:
they lead us to form different expectations about the world. The Empirical
Premise is meant to establish some relevant fact about the world. The Moral
Premise affirms a moral fact or normative judgment. We defend each of these
premises and work the meager moral fruits argument into a cumulative case for
naturalism.

Some Christians might insist on missing the point of the argument by reminding
us that even demons believe in God, which means we shouldn’t expect belief in
God to always bear fruit. But the argument isn’t really about “believing in
God”, full stop. It’s about _following_ God, following his commands, being in
a personal relationship with God, being led by the Spirit and not just the
flesh, bearing the fruits that the Bible says you’ll bear, being transformed
by the power of Christ. This is about the expectations that Christians have
_of themselves_ – _given_ their beliefs – and whether those expectations are
panning out.

There are three moving parts of the MMF argument, so critiques of the argument
will _tend_ to fall into one of three categories: criticism of the theological
premise, the empirical premise, or the moral premise.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F03%2F17%2Fthe-meager-moral-fruits-argument%2F&signup_flow=account)

In English, premise one is just the probability that we would make some
observation if naturalism were true. That exact likelihood may be hard to
determine, but that doesn’t matter. We can be much more confident of its value
_relative to_ a competing theistic hypothesis (in this case, Christianity). We
don’t need to assign exact numerical assessments as long as we can assign
comparative values. So if the probability of a given observation on naturalism
is n, the probability of that same observation on Christian theism is _less
than_ n. Therefore, our observation constitutes evidence against Christian
theism.

Critics of this argument will sometimes resist the theological premise,
somewhat desperately, and go so far as to deny that we should expect
Christians to stand out from non-Christians. This expectation, however, is not
something atheists are pulling out of thin air – this is what my Christian
community expected _of itself_! In my Protestant environment, faith over works
was the standard view. But works, I was taught, arose naturally when one’s
heart had truly been given over to God. Failing to bear these fruits or
continuing in a life of sin was a definite sign that the Spirit was not in
control – the Holy Spirit was not really having an influence over your life.
If one had sincerely given your life over to Christ, one would see a
difference manifest. Lack of moral and spiritual fruit was an ominous sign.

Tagged [abductive](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/abductive/),
[apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument/), [argument
against theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-against-
theism/), [atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [cumulative
case](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/cumulative-case/),
[draper](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/draper/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/),
[inductive](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/inductive/), [meager
moral fruit](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruit/),
[meager moral fruit
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruit-
argument/), [meager moral fruit of
theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruit-of-
theism/), [meager moral
fruits](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruits/),
[meager moral fruits
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruits-
argument/), [meager moral fruits of
theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruits-of-
theism/), [meagre moral fruit
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meagre-moral-fruit-
argument/), [meagre moral
fruits](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meagre-moral-fruits/), [mmf
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mmf-argument/), [paul
draper](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/paul-draper/), [what if I
stumble](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/what-if-i-stumble/)

So let’s lay this out in a general abductive form, since we’ll probably want
to factor the MMF argument into a cumulative case for naturalism. For
simplicity’s sake, we should lump together the moral claim and empirical
claim, and label those the “meager moral fruits” in question. The conjunct of
our empirical judgment and moral judgment _is_ the data – the meager moral
fruits – that we’re trying to explain.

This unfortunately doesn’t stop many from dismissively rejecting the argument
because Christianity teaches that we’re fallen creatures, depraved sinners in
need of redemption. But there are limits. It would be quite bizarre for a
Christian to maintain that the predictions of naturalism and the predictions
of Christian theism are in perfect alignment on the issue of moral fruits. In
order to reject the theological premise, one would have to maintain that Jesus
offers no transformational power, the influence of the Spirit has zero
tangible effect, and cutting oneself off from God – the foundation of goodness
itself – has no influence over moral conduct and character. Is that what
Christians ordinarily teach?

Not all versions of the MMF argument will follow the pattern of defending a
theological, empirical, _and_ moral premise. I think a theological and
empirical premise are both essential to the MMF argument, but the moral
premise isn’t _always_ there. For instance, one might defend a theological
premise along the lines of “Christianity does not predict that Christians
would be indistinguishable from non-Christians,” and an empirical premise like
“Christians and non-Christians are not appreciably different in their conduct
and character.” So there’s no moral premise in that argument, even though it’s
still recognizably a meager moral fruits argument. However, every MMF argument
will involve a theological and empirical claim, explicitly or implicitly.
Pushback against the argument will typically involve a rejection of the
theological, empirical, or (if it has one) moral premise.

**The Theological Premise** , roughly speaking, is the claim that Christianity
should bear moral fruit. (For example, “Christianity should be an aid to the
pursuit of the good for oneself and for others, not an obstacle.”)

**The Empirical Premise** is meant to establish some relevant fact about the
world. (For example, “Christianity has historically been an obstacle to LGBT
equality.”)

Does Christianity bear the kinds of moral fruit one might expect if it were
true? Does naturalism or Christian theism better predict the moral fruits and
lack thereof that we actually observe?

Tagged [aroup chatterjee](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aroup-
chatterjee/), [atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[catholic](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/catholic/), [charles
keating](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/charles-keating/),
[chatterjee](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/chatterjee/),
[christopher hitchens](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christopher-
hitchens/),
[donations](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/donations/),
[Duvalier](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/duvalier/), [Duvalier
dictatorship](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/duvalier-
dictatorship/), [fraud](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/fraud/),
[friend of poverty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/friend-of-
poverty/), [haiti](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/haiti/),
[hitchens](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/hitchens/),
[keating](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/keating/), [medical
practices](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/medical-practices/),
[mother teresa](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-teresa/),
[mother teresa fraud](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-
teresa-fraud/), [mother teresa
myth](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-teresa-myth/), [mother
teresa sadist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mother-teresa-
sadist/),
[Muggeridge](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/muggeridge/),
[saint](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/saint/), [Serge
Larivée](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/serge-larivee/)

This is actually similar to the “god is love” quotes all over the place. I
have yet to see where, but his reputation among believers in quite
unbelievable. God was a thug in the Bible.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2019%2F03%2F21%2Fthe-mother-teresa-myth-2%2F&signup_flow=account)

A few years ago, we discussed Mother Teresa’s unearned reputation on Counter
Apologetics. I wrote an updated version of the episode in 2019, and [reposted
it here](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/2022/03/27/the-mother-teresa-
myth/) to remind you that if you’ve never supported a brutal Haitian
dictatorship, participated in “one of the most heartless and cruel frauds in
modern memory,” or campaigned to make divorce illegal, you’re a better person
than Mother Teresa.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2Fabout%2F&signup_flow=account)

[Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/) is a podcast
about atheism and apologetics. Over the life of the podcast, it’s become
increasingly focused on the philosophy of religion.

[Walden Pod](https://audioboom.com/channels/4990493) is a philosophy, science,
and culture podcast. Consciousness comes up a lot.

For these reasons, we can still have good and evil, love and hate, praise and
blame, reward and punishment.

Is it true that such a world would preclude the existence of free will? Or at
least, free will in any meaningful sense of the term? Most philosophers would
say no, but if I had to guess, most non-philosophers would probably disagree.

Regardless, we do not have what Strawson calls “heaven and hell
responsibility.” Even with libertarian free will, it’s not clear that anyone
would deserve eternal conscious torment. The supposed consequences of
libertarian freedom drawn out by its defenders frequently do not follow from
the mere existence of libertarian free will. (This is part of why I question
whether it matters much if we possess libertarian freedom.) For instance,
eternal conscious torment or the death penalty are not justified purely in
virtue of the existence of libertarian free will.

I don’t understand how anyone can be satisfied with calling that “Free Will”.
We have *exactly* the same kind of “Free Will” as any other physical object,
the only difference is the *feeling* of freely choosing, and perhaps the
incredible organized complexity of our brains and bodies. Where is the freedom
in that?

I used to think compatibilists were (in a rather annoying way) redefining
terms. In fact, you can probably find older episodes of Counter Apologetics
where I say as much. So I lived a few years as a free will skeptic – as
someone who did not think we possessed freedom of the will in any meaningful
sense. But as the dust settled, and I went on listening to the debate between
compatibilists like Daniel Dennett and his incompatibilist opponents, I found
myself siding with Dennett on nearly every issue of substance. I thought back
to the numerous disagreements I’d had with fellow incompatibilists and free
will skeptics over praise, blame, and moral judgment. I eventually realized
that I was already a compatibilist in all but name.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F02%2F21%2Fcan-a-determinist-believe-in-free-will%2F&signup_flow=account)

Epistemic possibility (or something like it) runs throughout philosophy. This
may cause difficulties for one who arbitrarily decides that epistemic
possibility is insufficient for any meaningful alternate possibilities. The
fine-tuning argument, to give one example, runs on epistemic possibility.
Rejecting it in the realm of human behavior is arbitrary.

Furthermore, we don’t know the future. Since we don’t know what outcome will
come to pass, and since our conscious agency plays a role in determining what
will come to pass, it’s unwise to say that epistemic possibility is somehow
inauthentic, or doesn’t amount to “actual” or “genuine” alternate possibility.
No one – not even the libertarian – knows what the future holds. In some
sense, epistemic possibility is all we have.

I’ve never been able to get onboard with Free Will compatibilism. Even if our
consciousness does somehow exert downward causation (which it obviously does,
IMHO), all of our “choices” are either completely locked-in at the moment of
the Big Bang (or even “before” that), or effectively locked-in at human scales
with a bit of quantum randomness in the mix, neither of which gives us
anything more than just a *feeling* of having made a free choice.

Further, there’s still a distinction between **voluntary and involuntary
action, intentional and unintentional, approval and disapproval of first-order
desires, ordinary and extraordinary circumstances, reason-responsiveness and
non-reason-responsiveness**. That’s all still there even given determinism.

Whether or not libertarian free will obtains in our world is an interesting
metaphysical question, but I don’t see how it makes _much_ of a practical
difference. Free will skeptics and libertarians seem to me to be entirely
wrong about the dramatic consequences that would follow from not possessing
libertarian freedom. A compatibilist, I think, is someone who doesn’t have a
quarrel with using the term “free will” and who thinks that we don’t need to
run around with our hair on fire if determinism turns out to be true.

> (P1) Dan could’ve rolled a 1.
>
> (P2) Dan could’ve rolled a 0.

In some sense, both statements are false. But I think they’re clearly not
false _in the same way_. P1 is epistemically possible, and P2 is not possible
in any sense. With regards to P1, things really might have been otherwise.
People roll 1s all the time! And prior to rolling the die, we don’t know if
Dan will roll a 1. But we know they won’t roll a 0. I think there are plenty
of analogies when it comes to epistemic possibility in the realm of human
action. Dan might feed the hungry, or he might not. He’s done both in the
past, as have many others. However, he’s never eliminated world hunger, nor
could he.

Tagged
[compatibilism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/compatibilism/),
[compatibilist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/compatibilist/),
[dan dennett free will](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/dan-
dennett-free-will/), [daniel dennett free
will](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/daniel-dennett-free-will/),
[determinism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/determinism/),
[determinist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/determinist/), [free
will](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/free-will/), [freedom of the
will](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/freedom-of-the-will/), [galen
strawson free will](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/galen-strawson-
free-will/), [libertarian free
will](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/libertarian-free-will/),
[moral responsibility](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-
responsibility/)

Lately I’ve been trying to defend a compatibilist notion of “could’ve done
otherwise” that’s rooted in epistemic possibility. Say we need randomness or
indeterminacy in some form for freedom. Well, we can have randomness or
indeterminacy in some form: dice rolls are random, coin flips are random, and
so on. A Laplacean demon would know the outcome, but it’s nonetheless random
and indeterminate as far as we’re concerned. So epistemic indeterminacy, as
I’m calling it, is a kind that’s compatible with determinism. There’s a deeper
sense of indeterminacy in which even a Laplacean demon wouldn’t know the
outcome, but what I’m arguing is that we don’t need that deeper sense. (In
fact, I think we could simply reject the notion of “could’ve done otherwise”
entirely, but let’s say we want to preserve it in some form.) So there are
alternative possibilities open to us. Whether they count as “actual” or
“genuine” possibilities is a subtlety that I want to explore here.

Given what we’ve talked about so far – that there are still virtuous and non-
virtuous people, still a moral law to be followed or broken, suffering to be
diminished, standards by which we can judge actions and people, a distinction
between acts performed voluntarily, intentionally, with approval of first-
order desires under ordinary conditions and acts that were not, and given that
there is still conscious agency and a will that plays a crucial role in causal
history – this is where I turn to free will skeptics and libertarians and ask,
“What more do you want? Has anything actually changed?”

A roll of a die could’ve come up 1-6, and this is true (in some sense) even if
dice-rolling determinism is true (which I’ll assume from here on out). Say
that Dan rolled a 6, and consider the following propositions:

What else remains in place? Our conscious agency still plays a direct causal
role in determining what will happen next. It does not follow from determinism
that the same future will unfold regardless of what we do.

As you may have gathered, I’ve finally migrated from the free will skeptic
camp over to the compatibilist camp. Years ago, learning about determinism and
moral luck for the first time rocked my world. But as the dust settled, I
wondered if I had been too quick to reject the entire notion of free will. How
much does it matter that we don’t have libertarian free will? How much has
actually changed? Is our ordinary sense of free will really unsalvageable?

Given everything I’ve said so far, it seems that it would be misleading to say
that I _don’t_ believe in free will. Yet, one could accuse me of revisionism.
The concept of free will, the libertarian (and free will skeptic) might
object, has been mutilated past the point of recognition. I’m just changing
the subject! I would argue that while my compatibilism is, to some extent, a
revisionary project, (most if not all) compatibilist notions of freedom are
_close enough_ to the original that we are not simply changing the subject. At
least one element has been removed – a non-essential element – but many others
remain in place. Anyone concerned with freedom will take note of at least
_some_ of the conditions mentioned earlier – voluntary vs. involuntary,
intentional vs. unintentional, approval vs. disapproval of first-order
desires, ordinary vs. extraordinary circumstances, reason-responsive vs. not
reason-responsive. We would not describe a person acting involuntarily,
unintentionally, and with disapproval of their first-order desires as “acting
freely.” On the other hand, a person who is acting intentionally, voluntarily,
and with approval of their first-order desires would rightly be held
accountable in a way the first person would not be held accountable. Why?
Because they were acting according to their own free will!

[Listen to ep. 47 of Walden Pod, Can a determinist believe in free
will?](https://www.patreon.com/waldenpod)

Determinism, as I mentioned, doesn’t necessarily entail a denial of your
agency. I’m sure there are dumb versions of determism that deny your conscious
agency, but mine certainly doesn’t. Determinists don’t all hold that your
feeling of agency is just an illusion. Why does it feel like you have some
control over what you do? Because you do. Why does it feel like you’re
choosing what to do, and making decisions that determine your behavior?
Because you are. Why does it feel like my conscious intention to do x caused
my doing x? Because that really is what happened! Again, I don’t claim to
speak for all determinists. But I believe in mental causation; I think some
mental states are causally efficacious. It’s up to you at this moment to do
what you will do. Compatibilists can affirm this.

[Compatibilism](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/compatibilism/) is the
thesis that free will is compatible with determinism. In other words, a
compatibilist is someone who doesn’t have a quarrel with using the term “free
will” and who doesn’t think we need to run around with our hair on fire if
determinism turns out to be true. By my lights, free will skeptics and
libertarians seem to be entirely wrong about the dramatic consequences that
would follow from not possessing libertarian freedom.

Even given the full brunt of determinism and luck, a lot we care about remains
stubbornly in place. For instance, there are still virtuous and non-virtuous
people. There’s still a moral law that can be followed or broken. There is
still suffering and flourishing that can be diminished or maximized. There’s
still a social contract that can be honored or broken. There are still moral
standards by which actions and people can be judged, and we can succeed or
fail in living up to those standards. In other words, everything that mattered
before still matters, even if determinism is true and luck swallows
everything. [As J.P. Andrew put it](https://jpandrew.substack.com/p/the-
problem-of-free-will), “It would, to my mind, be a bizarre view of moral facts
indeed that understood them to hold only if free will is possible. Inflicting
suffering for fun is surely wrong regardless of the capacities we humans do,
or do not, possess.”

“But could you have done otherwise?” We should pause and remind ourselves what
is often (or at least sometimes) meant by “free will.” Are there actual
alternative possibilities open to us? Some have argued that we can’t deserve
praise and blame, reward and punishment, or be held morally responsible
without actual alternative possibilities.

Let’s make things even worse. Say that everyone is a product of [blind
luck](https://rintintin.colorado.edu/~vancecd/phil1100/Nagel1.pdf). “Luck
swallows everything,” [as Galen Strawson puts
it](https://www.naturalism.org/philosophy/free-will/luck-swallows-everything).
Everyone is just lucky or unlucky to be who they are, to be in the
circumstances in which they find themselves, to have the desires they have,
the willpower they possess, the values they hold, and so on.

Determinism doesn’t take away the power of your will, or mean there’s no
difference between a strong will and a weak will. It just means that your will
is one of those dominos in the causal chain. Determinism doesn’t strip you of
your agency or mean the same future will unfold regardless of what you do –
that only follows from a naive understanding of determinism. Your agency still
makes a difference. But you and your agency come in a context. You’re not a
_causa sui_ actor who floats free of the causal web. You’ve only been stripped
of freedom of the will in the superlative metaphysical sense, which you
couldn’t have had anyway, regardless of determinism, dualism, or anything
else. Our decisions will determine the character of the future. Since we don’t
know which future will come to pass, and since our conscious agency plays a
crucial role in determining what will come to pass, it is of profound
importance how we use our conscious agency.

This distinction comes in handy when we’re discussing “ought implies can.” If
determinism is true, then both P1 and P2 are false, in some sense. But we can
easily imagine rolling a 1 (in fact, Dan has done it before). He couldn’t
have, however, rolled a 0. Likewise, he can’t end world hunger, and is thus
not obligated to end world hunger. Ought implies can. But given the
opportunity to feed the hungry, he could’ve taken the opportunity even though
he failed this time (in fact, he’s done it before). Dan is free of the
obligation to end world hunger, but still feels a pang of conscience about
failing to feed the hungry when given the opportunity. And for some strange
reason, he finds no comfort in the truth of determinism. I would say he’s
right to feel that way – he could’ve fed the hungry, and he should’ve.

Say that [determinism](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/determinism-causal/)
turns out to be true. Everything can, in principle, be explained – everything
has a sufficient reason for being as it is and not otherwise. Every event in
consciousness and the physical world is determined by the concatenation of
antecedent events, conditions, and laws of nature.

I understand why the notion of libertarian Free Will is logically
incoherent…or at least seems to be. And I was a LFW skeptic for many years
because of this seeming incoherence. But at this point, while I can’t exactly
make sense of the notion of LFW, I nonetheless believe it exists. Granted,
it’s figuratively buried under layers of brain tissue, bodily physical
limitations, and external circumstances beyond one’s control, but I believe
it’s there. And I fully admit that I can’t really back up my intuition with
anh logical or empirical argument. 🤷🏻‍♂️

That’s how ST works as a response to an argument from evil: we can all agree
that there appears to be gratuitous evil in the world, but just because it
appears that way doesn’t mean that’s how it is in reality. How do you know
this apparently tragic event _didn’t_ happen for a reason? That there _isn’t_
a higher moral purpose to the terrible suffering we witness?

Sometimes you’ll hear believers say something to the effect of, “We are to God
as an ant is to a human. We can’t possibly understand his reasons!” Well,
whose fault is that? God chose to make us this way. Furthermore, that we can’t
understand why bad things happen to good people, why the wicked prosper, and
why so much suffering on earth seems to be without a purpose _itself_ causes
even more suffering. Again, God is the author of this confusion. We might
interrogate the point further since so many have lost their faith, and
consequently, are now burning in hell. Manufacturing a problem where there
isn’t one is baffling enough; but in this context, where the stakes are so
high, it’s worse than confusing. It’s monstrous.

Let’s say you had a daughter who needed to go to the doctor to undergo some
medical treatment. This treatment wasn’t going to be pleasant, but there’s a
good reason for it. This is essentially what many theists believe about
apparent tragedies. There is some greater moral purpose, some justifying
reason why God is allowing it to happen. We may not know what it is, but rest
assured, there’s a reason. But a good father would be there for his daughter
in the medical scenario. He would try to explain that there is a purpose, he
would make her understand if he could. Regardless, he would try to be a
comforting presence. However, many victims of tragedies don’t feel God’s
comforting presence. Some do, some don’t. This fact is much more likely on
naturalism than theism.

On the other hand, if they say, “I think this suffering would be terrible and
unnecessary, so I’m going to prevent it,” then they’re tipping their hand.
They, along with me, believe that the world is basically as it seems. There
_is_ gratuitous evil in the world. It’s not all necessary pain, like receiving
a vaccine against polio. And that’s why we should do something about it, if we
can.

Here’s one more example before we move on. In 1993, the photographer Kevin
Carter took a famous photograph of a starving child during a famine with a
vulture eagerly waiting behind him.

Skeptical theists, on the other hand, question the second premise, the
factual/empirical premise, which states that gratuitous suffering exists.
That’s what they’re skeptical of: the existence of gratuitous suffering, or at
least our ability to know gratuitous suffering when we see it. One could deny
both premises, but you only need to deny the factual premise to be a skeptical
theist. I mean, if you thought God is perfectly fine with gratuitous
suffering, then you’d just argue that, wouldn’t you? The only reason to invoke
ST is to cast doubt on the idea that there is such a thing as gratuitous
suffering. If you thought gratuitous suffering wasn’t a problem for theism,
you’d be better off trying to establish that and attack the theological
premise, rather than going down the ST rabbit hole.

So we’ve discussed several reasons to doubt skeptical theism: Draper’s
objection, phenomenal conservatism, that ST is compatible with any possible
set of observations, moral unintelligibility, divine silence during tragedies,
Pandora’s box, and moral paralysis. I also can’t help pointing out that the ST
strategy amounts to saying “God works in mysterious ways.” Well done,
expending so much energy on a philosophy that you could’ve found stitched onto
a pillow at your grandma’s house. I’ve made it no secret that I have contempt
for skeptical theism. How one can look at a starving child and confidently
say, “Hey, there might be a good reason for this,” strikes me as an obtuse
form of radical skepticism. You’re simply failing to appreciate the reality of
the situation, which is that there are tragedies occurring, some of them on
our watch. You’re failing to appreciate the world in which you live. You’d
rather not deal with it, so you pretend it’s otherwise than it is.

As many Christians and atheists have pointed out, appealing to human cognitive
limitations to defeat the evidential argument from evil is inconsistent with
the general project of apologetics. If our cognitive limitations really do
prevent us from assessing whether God has morally sufficient reasons for
allowing evil, then apologists cannot consistently appeal to other popular
arguments for God’s existence. Consistent skeptical theists should also claim
that human cognitive limitations prevent us also from assessing the antecedent
probability of fine-tuning on theism, the probability of our universe
beginning to exist on theism, and even the resurrection. This is one reason
why Richard Swinburne thinks Christians ought not rely on skeptical theism and
instead should actually attempt to provide explanations for why God would
allow the suffering we observe in our world.

> “[Carter] headed out into the open bush. There he heard whimpering and came
> across an emaciated toddler who had collapsed on the way to a feeding
> center. As he took the child’s picture, a plump vulture landed nearby. …
> Carter scared the creature away and watched as the child continued toward
> the center. He then lit a cigarette, talked to God and wept … In July 1994
> he took his own life, writing, ‘I am haunted by the vivid memories of
> killings & corpses & anger & pain.’”
>
> Time

Keep in mind, we’re not just talking about the suffering of adult humans.
We’re talking about the gratuitous suffering of moral agents and of non-moral
agents as well, where there seems to be very little chance of growth and
greater goods. A moral agent is a person who has the ability to discern right
from wrong, to act according to moral considerations, and to be held
accountable for their actions. When a lion kills, we don’t say it’s guilty of
murder. So young children and non-human animals are non-moral agents, since
they can’t engage in moral reasoning. Their gratuitous suffering is especially
hard to explain. It’s one thing for an adult human to suffer. It’s quite
another for a non-moral agent to suffer, which again, seems harder to explain
due to the diminished probability of soul-building.

Here are the two conflicting thoughts for you, as a skeptical theist: “I ought
to prevent this rape because I judge that that’s how goodness is best served,”
and “I cannot judge how goodness is best served.” If you give up your ability
to judge whether certain events are cases of pointless suffering or not, then
how can you make moral judgements, and therefore take moral actions? There’s
an intimate connection between moral judgement and moral action. If you give
up your powers of assessing whether suffering is unnecessary, then how can you
act? Can we trust our moral judgements about gratuitous suffering or not? The
ST tries to have it both ways.

> “To borrow an illustration from a developing field of science, Chaos Theory,
> scientists have discovered that certain macroscopic systems, for example,
> weather systems or insect populations, are extraordinarily sensitive to the
> tiniest perturbations. A butterfly fluttering on a branch in West Africa may
> set in motion forces which would eventually issue in a hurricane over the
> Atlantic Ocean. Yet it is impossible in principle for anyone observing that
> butterfly palpitating on a branch to predict such an outcome. The brutal
> murder of an innocent man or a child’s dying of leukemia could produce a
> sort of ripple effect through history such that God’s morally sufficient
> reason for permitting it might not emerge until centuries later and perhaps
> in another land. When you think of God’s providence over the whole of
> history, I think you can see how hopeless it is for limited observers to
> speculate on the probability that God could have a morally sufficient reason
> for permitting a certain evil. We’re just not in a good position to assess
> such probabilities.”
>
> _William Lane Craig_

> “The theistic responses to [the] argument [from evil] of which I am aware
> seem unpersuasive, and I find it hard to understand how belief in an all-
> good and all-powerful deity can survive in the face of it. Even if a theist
> supposes that the problem has a solution that we humans are unable to grasp,
> that would mean that God, who created us with the capacity to discover the
> laws of nature and to find the world scientifically intelligible, has made
> us incapable of finding the world morally intelligible. These are powerful
> reasons for doubt, and they have certainly destroyed the faith of some
> believers.”
>
> _Thomas Nagel_

So we had to take that little detour because some Christians, bizarrely, argue
that being good is perfectly compatible with causing or allowing suffering to
befall conscious creatures for literally no reason. Even though _we_ would
never do that, and we’re supposed to be little worms and sinners, God can do
that and still be considered maximally good. (Not to sound too much like a
cold-blooded utilitarian: technically, harming others or permitting them to be
harmed _for fun_ is more defensible than harming others or permitting them to
be harmed _for no reason_.)

This brings me to another objection to ST. I’m somewhat sympathetic to an idea
called phenomenal conservatism (and as it turns out, so are many theists).
According to Martin Smith, PC is a prominent view in epistemology that says
“if it seems to one that P is true then, in the absence of defeaters, one has
justification for believing that P is true.” The world seems a certain way to
you. Until you’ve been given good reason to think otherwise, you’re justified
in thinking the world is how it seems.

> “I beseech you, my brothers, remain faithful to the earth, and do not
> believe those who speak to you of otherworldly hopes! Poison-mixers are
> they, whether they know it or not. Despisers of life are they, decaying and
> poisoned themselves, of whom the earth is weary: so let them go.”
>
> _Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra_

Skeptical theists question the second premise. That’s what they’re skeptical
_of_ : the actual existence of gratuitous suffering. So what do we mean by
gratuitous suffering?

We shouldn’t lose sight of the fact that the world is not morally intelligible
to us because of God’s choice to make it that way. So we’re imagining a
problem that doesn’t exist, and many have lost their faith as a result; which,
according to many Christians, gets you sent to hell for an eternity.

Let’s say you were witness to an attempted sexual assault. You believe you
could prevent the assault, if you wanted to. But, you’re a skeptical theist.
If you had found out about the rape five minutes later, after the fact, then
you would’ve concluded that the event was not an instance of pointless
suffering, but will lead to a greater good, somehow (perhaps “in another
land”). But you’re a witness to it now, and you could prevent it. Everything
you know suggests that you should help, but you just can’t discount the
possibility that the best thing to do would be allow the rape to occur.

So honestly, in my opinion, Draper’s point is enough to put ST to bed. But as
you may have gathered, we have not exhausted the reasons ST annoys me. For
one, STs basically appeal to radical skepticism and dust off their hands as if
they’ve done something. One of my issues with ST is that it’s compatible with
any _possible_ set of observations. It’s basically a form of radical
skepticism, like the idea that you’re a brain in a vat or in the matrix. Of
course, I think it’s true that there’s often a distinction between appearance
and reality. But this is not a blank check to believe anything you please. If
some suffering in our world appears gratuitous, it’s safe to say it is
gratuitous in reality until shown otherwise.

Actually, a Christian could reject ST on these grounds. God _wouldn’t_ create
our faculties to be deceptive. But ST is predicated on the idea that God has
created our minds with a massive cognitive bias, and one that is far more
bewildering and dangerous than ordinary cognitive biases at that. If the
theist supposes that God would provide us with reliable moral faculties, they
can reject ST.

It just takes one example to show that there is suffering without a reason.  
Job 2 v3 (NIV): Then the Lord said to Satan, “Have you considered my servant
Job? There is no one on earth like him; he is blameless and upright, a man who
fears God and shuns evil. And he still maintains his integrity, though you
incited me against him to ruin him **without any reason**.”

Skeptical theism is a strategy for responding to the problem of evil. Human
cognitive limitations being what they are, we shouldn’t expect to understand
God’s plan, his actions, or his reasons for allowing suffering. Just as we
expect a small child to be blind to the reasons an adult has for allowing her
to suffer, e.g. in the case of undergoing necessary medical treatment, we
should expect that we will be blind to the reasons God has for allowing
suffering. After all, you’re not a Laplacean Daemon. You don’t have knowledge
of all the events that will ever occur, and how they’re all interconnected.
The world seems morally unintelligible? So what? The ST asks, “How do you know
there isn’t a higher moral purpose to children with cancer? Or the holocaust?
Or to innocents who become terribly maimed in accidents? Or to the millions of
years of animal suffering? Or to children trapped under rubble alone after an
earthquake? How do you know?”

Many words come to mind to describe such a person, but _good_ isn’t one of
them. In any event, a being who harms others or allows them to be harmed _for
no reason_ is not good. If a good God is to allow terrible evil to befall
humans and non-human animals, he _must_ have a reason. To quote Daniel Howard-
Snyder, “on the face of it, the idea that God may well permit gratuitous evil
is absurd. After all, if God can get what He wants without permitting some
particular horror (or anything comparably bad), why on earth would He permit
it?” If God is good, he doesn’t want there to be unnecessary horror. If he’s
all-powerful, he can prevent it from ever occurring.

To me, this diminishes suffering like we just mentioned. When you actually
look at concrete instances of suffering, the ST response seems almost
perverse. Furthermore, it’s practically a form of radical skepticism. So
they’re appealing to radical skepticism in order to argue that fawns burning
alive in the forest and children starving to death isn’t what it looks like.
And they’re not really even giving a reason why. They’re just saying there
might be a reason why; we can’t know for sure there isn’t one.

If we aren’t in any position to assess whether suffering is actually
gratuitous or not, are we in any position to trust our cognitive faculties as
reliable? After all, God must have had good reasons for implanting this
powerful cognitive bias into our minds. Again, God is the author of this
confusion. He created this powerful cognitive bias. How can we be sure he
hasn’t created our faculties to be inaccurate, deceptive, and misleading in
other ways? The ST already supposes that God has made our cognitive faculties
deceptive and inaccurate in this way. So, we should lose trust in our
cognitive faculties in general, shouldn’t we?

You’re probably already familiar with skeptical theism, even if you don’t know
it by that name. “God works in mysterious ways.” “We are to God as an ant is
to a human. What hope do we have of understanding why he does what he does,
allows what he allows?” “Everything happens for a reason.” “God is God, and I
am not.”

I took this example from real events that occurred somewhat recently, but it
could describe any number of people over the millennia. An earthquake —
natural evil — topples buildings and traps people under the rubble. They don’t
die right away, but of dehydration. So there have been children who died,
alone, trapped under rubble for days before dying of dehydration. If they had
to die, why not die instantly, rather than slowly and agonizingly in isolation
before finally dying? What was the point of that?

If suffering seems gratuitous, we’re justified in thinking that it _is_
gratuitous until we’ve been given reason to think otherwise — not just
suggested that there might be reasons to think otherwise. Of course there
might be reasons we could be wrong; that could be said about any hypothesis
that’s ever been offered.

> “If we are so ignorant of good and evil that we are in no position to assess
> whether an instance of suffering is pointless, then much of our ordinary
> moral reasoning goes out the window … Ordinarily, if we saw something
> terrible about to happen, such as an infant crawling into traffic, we would
> immediately come to the child’s rescue. This is because we implicitly make
> the judgment that the child’s death would be, on the whole, a bad outcome.
> However, skeptical theism tells us that we are in no position to make such a
> judgment. Thus, if we endorse [ST], we should always be in doubt about
> whether we have an obligation to prevent seemingly bad outcomes.”
>
> _Aron Lucas_

Skeptical theism is in conflict with the claim that, on theism, the
probability that we can trust our cognitive faculties is high. The cost of ST
is that theists can no longer confidently make that claim. As is probably
clear by now, ST causes problems that are worse than the one that it aims to
solve. It opens the floodgates for radical skepticism, including moral
skepticism, and thus, moral paralysis.

These arguments allow for the possibility of suffering in our world. Here,
we’re not trying to defend the idea that if God exists, suffering wouldn’t
exist. We’re saying that if God exists, _pointless_ suffering wouldn’t exist.
Evil that has no justifying reason; evil for evil’s sake. _That_ shouldn’t
exist if a good God exists.

One objection to ST is what’s called the Pandora’s Box objection. Once you’ve
endorsed radical skepticism as a response to the argument from evil, it’s hard
to keep that skepticism from influencing other things that you’d rather it not
influence.

One reason ST is not just incorrect, but dangerous, is that it excuses the
tragedies of our world and diminishes the suffering that’s right in front of
our eyes. If you’re convinced the world is the way that it is for a reason, I
can’t see why you’d change it. In reality, some of the gratuitous suffering is
within our control to alleviate. The world doesn’t have to be quite as awful
as it is, and it’s in our power to improve it somewhat. But if it’s not
_really_ gratuitous suffering, why try to prevent it? Why ease pain if it’s
guaranteed to be aimed at a higher purpose? Suffering, if it occurs, is
guaranteed to have a purpose. There is no such thing as pointless suffering,
remember? It’s an illusion. Why try to make the world better if you’re already
confident that there is literally no gratuitous suffering in the world? ST
engenders a sense of complacency. It strips you of the outrage you would’ve
felt at unjust suffering. And of course, STs behave like normal people. Their
ordinary moral intuitions reassert themselves when they’re not trying to
defend ST and excuse why god is behaving in a way indistinguishable from non-
existence. But the belief that everything is fine, that there is no pointless
suffering — i.e., suffering we should prevent — is not a belief I’d like to
see spread and take root.

Here’s another angle on this point. In his debate with William Lane Craig,
Draper said, “While there might be reasons we can’t understand why it’s a good
thing to allow this to happen, there might also be reasons we can’t understand
why it’s a bad thing to let it happen.” So while there may be greater goods of
which we are ignorant, this point cuts both ways. It’s antecedently equally
likely that more evil results from these tragedies than we know about. Maybe
there are greater goods of which we are ignorant, but it’s _equally plausible_
that there are greater evils of which we are ignorant. They’re equally strong
points. So the appeal to unknown greater goods doesn’t allow the theist to
escape any more than an appeal to unknown greater evils helps my argument. If
you can appeal to unknown greater goods, why can’t I appeal to unknown greater
evils? Again, these cancel out and leave us right where we began: trying to
make sense of the evidence we actually have.

Let’s take a step back. God has made the natural world coherent to us. The
laws of nature are discoverable and intelligible. He made things this way. So
why has he made the world _morally_ unintelligible? When the ST says, “There
could be unknown morally sufficient reasons,” they’re admitting that the world
seems morally unintelligible, first of all. They wouldn’t have brought up ST
otherwise. But they’re implying, absurdly, that God has decided to make the
world morally unintelligible to us. Why on earth would he intentionally cause
us to hallucinate a problem, especially one that would lead human beings
_away_ from a relationship with him? Doesn’t he want a relationship with us…?
God _chose_ to make the world morally unintelligible to us. He didn’t have to
do this. If the world really is morally intelligible in reality, that means
God is the author of confusion here. Why not make it so we can just _tell_
that it’s morally intelligible? We wouldn’t be having this conversation right
now. Atheists would lose one of their better arguments. Many of us wouldn’t
have lost our faith if the world were morally coherent. So, people are being
sent to hell for an eternity because God decided to create the illusion that
the world was morally incoherent.

The fact that there’s a jarring photograph helps make the pain concrete, but
it should be noted that there are millions, if not billions of similar cases
that we’ve never heard of that have occurred throughout evolutionary history.

> S = some facts about suffering
>
> I = the hypothesis of indifference
>
> T = the hypothesis of theism

For me, it’s absurd on its face to suggest that suffering like this works out
in the end towards some higher purpose. It’s hard enough to explain with adult
humans, but it seems impossible with the suffering of non-moral agents like
young, innocent children as they endure starvation and disease. Here, as in
the case of animals, there is seemingly no soul-making purpose or greater good
that could be achieved. To claim that there is some higher purpose, known only
to God, seems as implausible as it is insulting to those who endure such
pointless suffering.

Since God is good, he wouldn’t allow terrible things to occur for no reason.
That’s what gratuitous suffering is: suffering that God would have no morally
sufficient reason to permit or to create. **According to William Rowe, an
instance of suffering is gratuitous if an omnipotent, omniscient being could
have prevented it without losing some greater good or permitting some evil
equally bad or worse.** In other words, it’s gratuitous if the suffering was
pointless. But everyone can think of plenty of examples of pointless suffering
— suffering which led to no greater good. We’ll go into a few specific cases
later, but for now let’s just use William Rowe’s standard example of a fawn in
a forest fire. “Suppose in some distant forest lightning strikes a dead tree,
resulting in a forest fire. In the fire, the fawn is trapped, horribly burned,
and lies in terrible agony for several days before death relieves its
suffering.” It seems quite evident that “no greater good … would have been
lost had the fawn’s suffering been prevented.” So here we’ve got a non-moral
agent, a fawn, being horribly burned by a forest fire started by lightning —
natural evil — and suffering for days, alone, before finally dying. That
suffering did not lead to a greater good.

Here’s my 6,000 word diatribe against one of the most cursed ideas in
contemporary philosophy of religion, skeptical theism. We discuss several
reasons to doubt skeptical theism, including Paul Draper’s objection,
phenomenal conservatism, divine silence during tragedies, Pandora’s box, and
moral paralysis.

Pointless suffering is a problem for theism because if God is good, he
wouldn’t allow terrible evil to occur unless he had a reason. For the sake of
argument, I’ll grant you that God might allow suffering to exist in order to
fulfill some greater purpose. But a good being wouldn’t want there to be
avoidable, pointless, or unnecessary suffering with respect to the fulfillment
of his purposes; and an all-powerful being would be able to prevent such
suffering. A being who allows suffering or causes suffering that serves no
purpose and which occurs for literally no reason is not a good being.

> (1) If God exists, gratuitous suffering wouldn’t exist.
>
> (2) Gratuitous suffering exists.
>
> (C) God does not exist.

Tagged [argument from
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-from-evil/), [aron
lucas](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aron-lucas/), [cognitive
bias](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/cognitive-bias/), [evidential
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evidential-argument/),
[gratuitous evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/gratuitous-
evil/), [gratuitous
suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/gratuitous-suffering/),
[moral paralysis](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-
paralysis/), [paul draper](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/paul-
draper/), [phenomenal
conservatism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/phenomenal-
conservatism/), [problem of
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/problem-of-evil/), [ryan
stringer](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ryan-stringer/),
[skeptical theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptical-
theism/), [skeptical
theist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/skeptical-theist/), [thomas
nagel](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/thomas-nagel/)

[Jeffery Jay Lowder – In Defense of an Evidential Argument from Evil: A Reply
to William Lane Craig
(2016)](https://infidels.org/library/modern/jeff_lowder/pain-and-
pleasure.html) [infidels.org]

Many theists give the same analogy I just gave to defend ST. We’re all like
the child undergoing medical treatment. We’re experiencing pain, but it’s for
a good reason that we can’t appreciate at the moment. Our loving father,
however, does understand the reason. I’m embracing their analogy. What a good
father does in that situation, if he can’t make his child understand, is be a
comforting presence in the midst of that suffering. However, many who are
enduring tragedy do not feel God’s comforting presence. On naturalism, this is
not surprising. On theism, it’s quite surprising.

Imagine if I stood by watching an elderly couple being mugged. The mugger has
their money, but he’s beating them, and they’re totally defenseless. For the
sake of the example, let’s say that I judged myself able to prevent the
mugging, if I wanted to. It would be really easy for me, for whatever reason.
But I continue to watch this helpless old couple receive a ruthless beating
until they’re unconscious. The police arrive and ask why I didn’t try to stop
the mugging.

> (1) Pr(S/I) = quite high
>
> (2) Pr(S/T) = quite low
>
> (3) Therefore, Pr(S/I) > Pr(S/T)
>
> (4) Therefore, S is evidence is that favors indifference over theism

This is one of those rare cases where philosophy of religion meets with
Christianity as it’s actually known out in the wild. Skeptical theists, in
response to the seemingly gratuitous evil we witness in our world, point out
that we are not in the same epistemic position as God. Since we’re not
omniscient, we can’t claim to know all the intricate connections between the
events of our world. Something may _seem_ like a tragedy, but it may have led
to some greater good of which we’re simply unaware.

> “According to [the skeptical theist’s] response, we can all agree that there
> appears to be gratuitous evil in the world, but we cannot infer its reality
> from its appearance. Such an inference assumes that if there are morally
> sufficient reasons for God to permit or create the world’s apparently
> gratuitous evil, then we probably will discern them. But this discernibility
> assumption is questionable in virtue of our epistemic limitations. Because
> of these limitations, we might be currently or permanently unable to discern
> the morally sufficient reasons that God could have for permitting or
> creating the world’s apparently gratuitous evil. … our epistemic limitations
> make the possibility of there being mysterious morally sufficient reasons
> for God to permit or create the world’s apparently gratuitous evil…”
>
> _Ryan Stringer_

Paul Draper has argued that while it’s possible that God has unknown reasons
for permitting evil, it’s also possible — and antecedently just as likely —
that God would have unknown reasons for _preventing_ evil. So when a skeptical
theist claims that God has secret morally sufficient reasons for allowing the
brutal rape and murder of a child, or a fawn burning alive in a forest fire,
or starvation due to famine, the problem is that it’s equally likely that God
would have unknown reasons for _preventing_ those evils. To quote Jeff Lowder,
“So the possibilities of unknown reasons for allowing evil and unknown reasons
for preventing evil cancel out. We’re right back where we started, namely,
working with what we do know.”

> “Taken to its logical conclusion, skeptical theism prevents us from saying
> that God wouldn’t have good reasons for allowing our cognitive faculties to
> be wildly inaccurate and deceptive. For all we know, God has very good
> reasons for instilling us with false memories, or making us brains in vats.
> Skeptical theism thereby gives us reasons to be skeptical of…memory,
> perception, a priori reasoning, etc.”
>
> _Aron Lucas_

> “[An explorer] saw an immense field entirely covered with skeletons, and
> took it to be a battlefield. However they were nothing but skeletons of
> large turtles, five feet long, three feet broad, and of equal height. These
> turtles come this way from the sea, in order to lay their eggs, and are then
> seized by wild dogs (canis rutilans); with their united strength, these dogs
> lay them on their backs, tear open their lower armour, the small scales of
> the belly, and devour them alive. But then a tiger often pounces on the
> dogs. Now all this misery is repeated thousands and thousands of times, year
> in, year out. For this then, are these turtles born. For what offence must
> they suffer this agony? What is the point of the whole scene of horror?”
>
> _Arthur Schopenhauer_

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F03%2F01%2Fskeptical-theism%2F&signup_flow=account)

Take the example of the daughter undergoing painful but necessary medical
treatment. That’s essentially the situation theists claim that we’re in.
Preventing apparently gratuitous suffering could be as foolish as preventing
your daughter from getting the polio vaccine because it would be painful to
get the vaccine. Of course you’d rather her take the shot to prevent the
possibility of polio in the future, obviously. But if that’s the case with the
evils of our world, you’d be profoundly foolish to try to do anything about
them (or at least many of them).

Everyone agrees that there seems to be gratuitous suffering. So until you’ve
offered a defeater for that seeming, then we’re rationally justified in
affirming that the world is how it seems in this regard. And since the
existence of gratuitous suffering is far more likely on naturalism than on
theism, the fact that we observe gratuitous suffering is strong evidence
against theism.

> (1) If God exists, gratuitous suffering probably wouldn’t exist.
>
> (2) Gratuitous suffering probably exists.
>
> (C) God probably does not exist.

So before we move on to my several objections to ST, I want to talk about a
few examples of gratuitous suffering so it doesn’t become too abstract, and we
don’t lose sight of the moral significance of what we’re discussing.

Skeptical theism basically asserts that humans suffer from a massive cognitive
bias: we see gratuitous suffering where there is none. In fact, this alleged
cognitive bias is arguably the most pervasive cognitive bias in the human
catalogue. Sometimes we mistake correlation for causation, sometimes we
experience pareidolia and see faces in random patterns, and we often judge
suffering to be unnecessary. How silly of us!

That first premise, God wouldn’t allow gratuitous suffering, is what’s called
the theological premise. The second premise, that gratuitous suffering exists
(or probably exists), is what’s called the factual or empirical premise.
That’s the one STs want to question. As I’ve explained, I think it’s pretty
clear that a good God wouldn’t allow gratuitous suffering to exist. We can
grant, for the sake of argument, that he’d allow suffering to exist, but there
has to be some reason that justifies its existence if God is good. So denying
the first premise is out, for me. But even if we can conjure up some scheme in
which God allows utterly pointless suffering to occur, I hope we can admit
that this would be surprising. God is supposed to be good, after all; and
causing or allowing gratuitous suffering falls outside our ordinary rubric of
the good. So we could say, modestly: If God exists, gratuitous suffering
probably wouldn’t exist.

There are genuine tragedies in our world. Gratuitous evils. Times when the
good to come out of a terrible situation is negligible or non-existent. The
existence and abundance of tragedies is far more likely on a hypothesis of
indifference than on theism. On theism, you’d expect some good to overcome the
weight of the tragedy. In other words, there shouldn’t be _genuine_ tragedies.
And for skeptical theists, tragedies are a myth! There are only _apparent_
tragedies, since God either will make it right in the end, or he has a
justifying reason for allowing the seemingly gratuitous evil. For STs, there
is no case of a calamity that was visited upon an innocent…and that’s all.
There must be some kind of higher moral purpose. So if you believe in
tragedies, times when something terrible really wasn’t justified and wasn’t
outweighed by any notable good, then you can’t be a skeptical theist. What’s
more, that’s evidence for naturalism over theism. The probability of the
existence of gratuitous suffering on a hypothesis of indifference is quite
high. But on a hypothesis like theism, it’s quite low.

[Debate Breakdown w/ Ben Burgis: Christopher Hitchens vs. David
Berlinski](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/08/31/debate-breakdown-
w-ben-burgis-christopher-hitchens-vs-david-berlinski/ "This is my appearance
on Ben Burgis’s channel. Ben and I listen to and comment on a debate between
Christopher Hitchens and David Berlinkski over the motion “Atheism poisons
everything.” The video Linktree")

****You are commenting using your Facebook account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'facebook' \);) / Change
)

[61 - The Vagueness Argument Against Physicalism
](https://audioboom.com/posts/8216604 "When did consciousness first evolve? If
physicalism is true, we’d expect it to have evolved gradually, just as other
complex biological phenomena evolved gradually. But the transition from
feeling nothing to feeling something couldn’t have been gradual. No matter how
minimal a conscious experience is, if it’s “like something” to exist –
anything at all – it’ \[…\]")

[CA109 Meager Moral Fruits w/ Real
Atheology](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/12/28/ca109-meager-
moral-fruits-w-real-atheology/ "Ben Watkins of Real Atheology joins me to
discuss the meager moral fruits argument, a few objections to the argument,
and why we’re interested in it in the first place. Subscribe to Real Atheology
on YouTube and on iTunes  Follow us on Twitter @waldenpod @RealAtheology
@SpeedWatkins  Subscribe on YouTube Listen to our sister show, Walden …
Continue reading C \[…\]")

One little footnote… I think some anti-theists, new atheists – whatever you
want to call them – are sometimes operating under the assumption that the most
widely-subscribed forms of theism are truer to the core ideas of theism or
Christianity than the “watered-down” forms that I’m considering to be more
defensible. I’d very much like to have that argument out in the open, so
please – make that argument explicitly, if that’s what you think. I probably
won’t be entirely unsympathetic to it. After all, we’re talking about
_revealed_ religion. Are we supposed to believe that God revealed it poorly?
If God is concerned with his followers having the right beliefs – say, if
salvation depended on it – it would be really weird if the right beliefs were
held only by a tiny minority of theists. (Nevertheless, I think that theists
who represent the best that the tradition has to offer possess resources for
answering these sorts of problems that fundamentalists lack. As I said, I’d
very much like to have this debate with nonbelievers out in the open rather
than try to guess the specifics of their thinking.)

[CA108 Psychophysical Harmony, Physicalism, & God w/ Brian
Cutter](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/11/30/ca108-psychophysical-
harmony-physicalism-god-w-brian-cutter/ "Dr. Brian Cutter joins me to discuss
his paper, ‘Psychophysical Harmony: A New Argument for Theism‘, coauthored
with Dr. Dustin Crummett. After talking about epiphenomenalism and why William
James’ argument against it works against all views in philosophy of mind
\(with the lone exception of Type-A materialism\), we explain why
psychophysical harmony seems so \[…\]")

[CA105 Responding to Trent Horn’s “5 Atheist Double
Standards”](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/09/07/ca105-responding-
to-trent-horns-5-atheist-double-standards/ "This is my response to Catholic
apologist Trent Horn’s recent video entitled “5 Atheist Double Standards.”
\(The first minute is a cold open. It makes more sense if you’re watching the
video version.\) Watch on YouTube Interview on the Sentientism podcast The
Meager Moral Fruits Argument My devil’s advocate debate Follow me on Twitter
@waldenpod … Continue rea \[…\]")

[CA106 One Hell of a Problem – w/ Real Atheology & Counter
Apologist](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/10/07/ca106-one-hell-of-
a-problem-w-real-atheology-counter-apologist-2/ "I’m joined by Counter
Apologist and Ryan from Real Atheology to discuss eternal conscious torment.
First, we take a closer look at the views of William Lane Craig, who famously
denies the possibility of an actual infinite in the context of the kalam, yet
seems to argue that the guilt of those who reject God … Continue reading CA106
One Hell of a Problem – w/ \[…\]")

The main issue with the activists is that they seem to think they’re the best
at both projects, despite never engaging with the strongest versions of
theism. Unfortunately, some are incapable of admitting that there is any
gradient of quality in the first place. I’m sure some of them are reading and
thinking, “There are no plausible versions of theism! They’re all equally
implausible!” This is why you’re perceived as idiots. If you can’t detect any
difference between _I Don’t Have Enough Faith to Be an Atheist_ by Frank Turek
and _The Existence of God_ by Richard Swinburne, that’s a you-problem. But
let’s be honest, you haven’t read the latter – or if you did, you didn’t have
the tools to understand it. That’s why you think there’s no gradient, and that
all forms of theism – everything from Lee Strobel’s theism to David Bentley
Hart’s theism – are equally implausible.

The core of chrsitanity is that anyone who disagrees with a god that can’t be
shown to exist will be punished and that this god needed a blood sacrifice by
torture to make itself happy. So your claim ““There are no plausible versions
of theism! They’re all equally implausible!” This is why you’re perceived as
idiots. If you can’t detect any difference between I Don’t Have Enough Faith
to Be an Atheist by Frank Turek and The Existence of God by Richard Swinburne,
that’s a you-problem.” is nonsense. Swinburne is like Tillich, etc, inventing
a god that is so vague it can’t be shown to exist or not.

[59 - Metaethics & Moral Realism w/ Michael
Huemer](https://audioboom.com/posts/8157791 "Dr. Michael Huemer joins me to
discuss moral realism vs. antirealism, ethical intuitionism, phenomenal
conservatism, moral disagreement, and much else in moral philosophy.  Ethical
Intuitionism  Knowledge, Reality, and Value: A Mostly Common Sense Guide to
Philosophy  William Lane Craig vs. Erik Wielenberg  Linktree / The Five
Metaethical Positions /  Noncog \[…\]")

this strikes me as nothing more than the courtiers claim that there is at all
a “best form” aka “sophisticated theology”. All claims for the existences of
gods fail since they have no evidence for their claims at all.

[Discussion on
Miracles](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2023/01/09/miracles-panel/
"Friendly debate between three miracle skeptics and a theist.
linktr.ee/emersongreen Subscribe on YouTube Listen to our sister show, Walden
Pod here Music by ichika Nito & Whalers. Used with permission. Follow on
Twitter @waldenpod Consider supporting the show on Patreon here or Walden Pod
here")

[Sentientism Interview (pt. 1) ](https://audioboom.com/posts/8152944 "
linktr.ee/emersongreen  Subscribe on YouTube  Consider supporting the show on
Patreon here or Counter Apologetics here  Listen to our sister show, Counter
Apologetics here  Music by ichika Nito and used with permission.  Full
interview on the Sentientism podcast  Twitter @waldenpod @OnPanpsychism ")

A Christian who is actually consistent in this regard, David Bentley Hart, has
written scathingly about both:

[Sentientism Interview (pt. 2) ](https://audioboom.com/posts/8152946 "
linktr.ee/emersongreen  Subscribe on YouTube  Consider supporting the show on
Patreon here or Counter Apologetics here  Listen to our sister show, Counter
Apologetics here  Music by ichika Nito and used with permission.  Full
interview on the Sentientism podcast  Twitter @waldenpod @OnPanpsychism ")

Why can’t we just agree that we’re doing different things? When two people
have different goals, it won’t make sense to act in the same way. It’s not as
if the activist crowd is unconcerned with the truth – the activists are
generally more concerned with attacking the truth _of influential beliefs_
that make the world worse. (This is entirely sensible.) Philosophers are
generally more concerned with addressing the best versions of each side, since
that’s the best way of figuring out whether we should be theists, atheists, or
agnostics. (This is entirely sensible.) Again, my main issue with the activist
crowd is that they seem to think they’re the best at both, despite never
engaging with the strongest versions of the view they reject.

Theists often bemoan the low quality of contemporary public atheism. In a way,
I agree with them. But they’re not blameless. Contemporary atheism wasn’t
formed in a vacuum: It’s a _response_ to contemporary theism. Most atheists
are former believers who left the faith; what they’re responding to is their
idea of Christianity, which they formed as a part of the Christianity
community. You can criticize the quality of contemporary atheism _and_
contemporary Christianity, but you can’t just criticize atheism without
acknowledging one of the major reasons it is the way it is. There’s no
coherent way to dissociate the shallowness of contemporary atheism from the
shallowness of contemporary theism, specifically Christianity.

These are both worthwhile, but there’s a dispute over them between many
atheists. This conflict is something I used to wrestle with internally quite a
bit: Should we address _popular_ versions of theism – beliefs that are
widespread and have the most influence in the world? Or should we address the
_best, most defensible_ versions of theism, which are bound to be less
popular?

Unlike many activists, I think there’s no reason to disparage the activist
project _or_ the philosophical project. The best exemplars of both are
admirable. And as stated earlier, the trade-offs don’t need to be serious.
Maybe you were freed from the constraints of fundamentalism by others, so you
spend a lot of your time trying to do the same for others. That doesn’t mean
you can’t also spend time actually trying to figure out whether God exists.
However, assuming you want to do whatever you’re doing well, these projects
will occupy a lot of time, which is why the trade-offs exist to begin with.
It’s not that these projects are _incompatible_ ; they’re just distinct from
one another and we only have a finite amount of time in this life. You get to
decide what that time will be occupied by. What kind of balance will you
strike? How much of your time will be occupied by the worst forms of theism,
and how much by the best?

[57 - Is Utilitarianism the Only Good Ethical Theory? w/ Matthew Adelstein
](https://audioboom.com/posts/8138436 "I'm joined by Matthew Adelstein of
Deliberation Under Ideal Conditions for Utilitarianism 101. We also talk about
a few basic things everyone needs to know to be conversant in moral
philosophy.  YouTube Matthew's Channel  Matthew's Blog \(Bentham's Bulldog\)
Consider supporting the show on Patreon here or Counter Apologetics here
Listen to \[…\]")

In the past, I’ve defended new atheism from its critics on the grounds that
new atheism was a socio-political-cultural response to the malignant influence
of certain strains of fundamentalism. It was _not_ an attempt to contribute to
cutting edge analytic philosophy of religion. On the existence of God, they
helped cross off a couple bad answers, if we’re being generous. But I can’t
ignore the fact that many fans of the new atheists wouldn’t like my defense,
since they clearly think the new atheists put the entire issue to bed. Before
I knew anything about the debates that have taken place at the highest level
for centuries, I thought something similar. The forms of theism that the new
atheists reacted to, however, do not represent the best that theism can offer.

  *     * [ ![](https://emersongreenblog.files.wordpress.com/2017/08/cropped-ca-logo-darker.png?w=50) Emerson Green ](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com)

[58 - Defending Libertarian Free Will w/ Necessary Being & John
Buck](https://audioboom.com/posts/8139889 "I'm joined by two proponents of
libertarian free will to discuss determinism, the phenomenology of free
choices, how "ought implies can" could prove we have the ability to do
otherwise, and much else.  linktr.ee/emersongreen YouTube Support the podcast
at patreon.com/waldenpod or /counter Listen to our sister show, Counter
Apologetics here Mus \[…\]")

Host of Walden Pod and Counter Apologetics. [ View all posts by Emerson Green
](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/author/emersongreenblog/)

> Contrary to conventional wisdom, Christianity has never really taken deep
> root in America or had any success in forming American consciousness; in its
> place, we have invented a kind of Orphic mystery religion of personal
> liberation, fecundated and sustained by a cult of Mammon.
>
> _[Three Cheers for Socialism
> (2020)](https://www.commonwealmagazine.org/three-cheers-socialism)_

To recap, I made the controversial claim that there is a distinction between
the best and worst forms of theism, that we only have a finite amount of time
on the earth, and that most people seem to err on the side of using that time
to address the worst rather than the best. Personally, I don’t care what kind
of trade-off you make in your personal or public life, so long as you don’t
pretend that you’ve debunked theism merely by addressing a few harmful forms
that you have the most personal experience with.

[Metaethics & Moral Realism w/ Michael
Huemer](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/09/26/metaethics-moral-
realism-w-michael-huemer/ "Dr. Michael Huemer joins me to discuss moral
realism vs. antirealism, ethical intuitionism, phenomenal conservatism, moral
disagreement, and much else in moral philosophy. \(This aired originally on
YouTube and Walden Pod.\) Ethical Intuitionism Knowledge, Reality, and Value:
A Mostly Common Sense Guide to Philosophy William Lane Craig vs. Erik
Wielenberg Link \[…\]")

There are three variables that tend to influence the conversation here:
Popularity, plausibility, and harm. If you max out on plausibility, then
popularity has likely taken a big hit, and vice versa. If a belief is
unpopular, implausible, and benign, then your time would be better spent
engaging with something else. But if you alter any of those variables, I think
there’s a decent reason to address it. Still, depending on what you care about
_the most_ , different actions make sense. A balance needs to be struck
between these distinct projects, especially if you intend on doing them well.
Assuming you want to be good at whatever it is you’re doing, both projects are
time-consuming.

****You are commenting using your Twitter account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'twitter' \);) / Change
)

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F01%2F25%2Faddressing-popular-forms-of-theism-vs-the-best-forms%2F&signup_flow=account)

Freeing others from the illegitimate spiritual and moral and intellectual
constraints placed on them by religion is a commendable way to spend one’s
time. (There are religious people who do that as well – I’ve met many of them
in philosophy of religion.) I also think it matters whether or not God exists,
so that’s an interesting way to spend one’s time as well. Yet, those who are
focused on the truth of the matter are often perceived as elitist by the
activist crowd, and the activists are often perceived as idiots by the
philosopher crowd.

There were quite a few subjects raised that are worth addressing further. I
could have made an episode like this one aimed instead at theists who have
mostly concerned themselves with attacking the most popular forms of atheism
rather than the best forms of atheism. It’s not as if the overconfident
theists in the apologetics space have engaged with Paul Draper, Graham Oppy,
J.L. Schellenberg, or J.H. Sobel. Most of the loudmouths online haven’t done
their due diligence, regardless of whether they’re theists or atheists.

Some atheists are primarily concerned with helping others. As a result, they
see no point in spending time on things that have no significant influence in
the world. Other atheists are primarily concerned with getting to the truth of
the matter. As a result, they see no point in beating up on creationism,
literalism, inerrantism, and other ideas that to them seem trivially false.
Whether or not God exists does not hang on whether inerrantism is true! It
doesn’t depend on whether this or that harmful form of fundamentalism makes
any sense. You could be _right_ that a particular form of Christianity is
false and harmful. And yet, it’s entirely possible that God exists, and will
someday say “Well done, good and faithful servant” to those who fought the
evil committed in his name.

[60 - Why I Support Abolition of the Death
Penalty](https://audioboom.com/posts/8208259 "In many ways, I'm the ideal
audience for apologists of capital punishment. I believe in free will, I think
human beings are responsible for their actions, I’m not opposed to retribution
in all cases, I believe there are virtuous qualities to revenge, and I think
some people deserve to die. However, none of that is enough to justify the
death penalty sys \[…\]")

The boring but entirely true answer is that it depends on what your goals are.
If you have goal A, then action Y makes sense. If you have goal B, then action
Z makes sense, and doing Y might seem bizarre. If you’re concerned with
activism and improving the world, then you should spend your time differently
than someone who’s concerned purely with figuring out what’s true. Most
atheists care about both, and virtually podcast, blog, and YouTube channel
dips into both subjects. As is so often the case, there are unavoidable trade-
offs in how you spend your finite time. Trying to reduce the harm caused by
religion is a good thing – it’s a public service. But focusing on what’s
widely accepted in the pews is not the same thing as trying to figure out
whether God exists. The most widely adopted version of theism is not _also_
the most plausible version of theism.

“Ken Ham is wrong” is not synonymous with “Christianity is false,” even though
some seem to think it is. “Frank Turek is an overconfident moron” is
undoubtedly true, but that doesn’t mean God doesn’t exist. How is this not
totally obvious?

If you’re more activist-oriented, then you’re probably concerned with fighting
religious abuses, maintaining the separation of church and state, protecting
education from the influence of religious fundamentalists, and liberating
people from the illegitimate constraints placed on them by religious
authorities and tradition. If it isn’t obvious, I gladly join hands with these
people. But if you’re _primarily_ concerned with these goals, there may be
trade-offs with regard to another goal: Uncovering the truth about theism.

There’s just not much overlap between what I’m calling the activist project
and the project of getting closer to the truth about theism. But the trade-
offs needn’t be too serious. Maybe you’re dunking on Turek as one hobby among
others for the common good, while you strive to engage the best of theism in
your downtime. If so, that’s great. Unfortunately, it doesn’t seem like that’s
what many activists are actually doing.

[CA107 The Participation Theodicy — w/ John
Buck](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/11/17/ca107-the-
participation-theodicy-w-john-buck/ "The participation theodicy holds,
reasonably enough, that it would be good to create an ideal world. Since it
would be good for God to do so, it would also be good for us to do so \(as
well as any other beings\). The goodness would only be multiplied through our
participation and contribution to the … Continue reading CA107 The
Participation Theodicy — w/ John \[…\]")

****You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'wordpress' \);) /
Change )

When I first started thinking about apologetics way back when, I said that my
main concern was the truth: I just wanted to know whether or not God exists. I
still hold that aim. However, I used to be a lot more of an anti-theist. I
shared Bertrand Russell’s sentiment expressed in _Why I Am Not A Christian_ :
“I am as firmly convinced that religions do harm as I am that they are
untrue.” And today, even though I wouldn’t call myself an anti-theist, I still
believe that there are obviously harmful forms of religion, including quite
popular forms of fundamentalism. But combating harmful and widespread forms of
fundamentalism is not all that related to the first goal of figuring out
whether theism is true. They’re two distinct projects: Figuring out the way
the world is and trying to make the world a better place.

Huemer, after discussing paradoxes of omnipotence in his book, [_Knowledge,
Reality, and Value_](https://www.amazon.com/Knowledge-Reality-Value-Mostly-
Philosophy/dp/B091F5QTDS), shared a few thoughts that I think have wider
relevance to the discussion of theism vs. atheism:

A topic like this often leads to the value of philosophy, since – surprise,
surprise – virtually all of these overconfident morons hate philosophy. But
the highest-level discussion of theism vs. atheism is mostly going to take
place in philosophy. The reason for this is that thinking hard about the
question, analyzing every relevant concept and assumption with a microscopic
attention to detail is basically a description of analytic philosophy. So if
you think concepts are best left unclear, and assumptions best left unstated
and unexamined, then you should look somewhere other than analytic philosophy
to explore the question.

People in my position are often harsh to the activist-oriented crowd, but
that’s not because I’m against their project. It’s because there’s often false
advertising on their side. Virtually all atheists (this includes atheist
podcasts, blogs, and channels) claim to be able to provide good reasons to
disbelieve (or lack belief) in God or gods. This includes those who don’t
primarily concern themselves with apologetics or philosophy of religion. The
problem is their insistence that they have provided good reasons to reject
theism without ever engaging with the best versions of theism! If you want
your rejection of x to seem warranted, you should engage with the best form of
x, not the worst. It makes no difference to add that it’s a very popular or
very harmful version of x. It doesn’t matter. If you’re extremely confident in
your atheism, and yet you’ve never looked at the strongest forms of theism,
then you’re a dogmatic idiot.

I hasten to add that there’s nothing wrong with spending time wrestling with
popular-level apologetics – even if your goal is to get to the truth of the
matter – assuming that those apologists represent a worldview that is a live
option for you. If the more popular material is interacting with what _you_
believe (or recently believed), then it makes perfect sense to spend your time
with those videos, podcasts, texts, and so on. For me, it used to be a big
deal that a certain narrow conception of Christianity was false. But since I
wanted to figure out whether or not God exists, I didn’t _stop_ there.
Refuting the version of Christianity that I used to believe is frankly not
that hard. If you want your rejection of Christianity to be rational, you
should engage with the best of what Christians have to offer. Camping out on
the least plausible versions forever doesn’t actually advance your
understanding beyond eliminating a couple bad options. At worst, it’s deeply
dishonest to refute the worst version of an idea, stop there, and act as if
the entire idea has been refuted.

> The utter inconsequentiality of contemporary atheism is a social and
> spiritual catastrophe. Something splendid and irreplaceable has taken leave
> of our culture—some great moral and intellectual capacity that once inspired
> the more heroic expressions of belief and unbelief alike. Skepticism and
> atheism are, at least in their highest manifestations, noble, precious, and
> even necessary traditions, and even the most fervent of believers should
> acknowledge that both are often inspired by a profound moral alarm at evil
> and suffering, at the corruption of religious institutions, at psychological
> terrorism, at injustices either prompted or abetted by religious doctrines,
> at arid dogmatisms and inane fideisms, and at worldly power wielded in the
> name of otherworldly goods. In the best kinds of unbelief, there is
> something of the moral grandeur of the prophets—a deep and admirable
> abhorrence of those vicious idolatries that enslave minds and justify our
> worst cruelties.
>
> [_Believe It or Not
> (2010)_](https://www.firstthings.com/article/2010/05/believe-it-or-not)

To pursue the question of God’s existence, we must engage with the better
forms of theism, which will probably not have [multi-million dollar theme
parks dedicated to them](https://arkencounter.com/). As Michael Huemer put it,
“Who cares if you can refute the craziest version of a view? … The way to
learn is to address the most interesting defensible views, not to spend our
time discussing trivially false ideas.” Even if those trivially false ideas
are widespread, wield lots of influence in the world, and are positively
dangerous, they’re still trivially false. If your primary goal is to uncover
the nature of reality, it doesn’t make any sense to spend your finite time
attacking less plausible versions of theism, even if they’re more popular and
harmful. The (uncomfortable to some) consequence of this is that you’re bound
to spend time examining views of that world that very few people believe in.
If you’re more activist-oriented, this seems totally absurd. Why would you
waste time talking about something that wields no influence and that people
aren’t affected by? If no one in the pews would accept it, why spend time
thinking about it? On the other hand, if you’re simply pursuing the truth, it
seems wasteful to spend time talking about beliefs that are obviously false –
their popularity and harmfulness is irrelevant.

On this podcast and in my life, the balance may tilt a little more towards
pursuing the truth and a lot less towards harm-reduction, since I spend more
time thinking about universalist Christianity and the best arguments for
theism, even though neither of those things wield any influence at all in the
Christian communities in which I was raised. I don’t care, because the
Christian worldview espoused in those communities is obviously false. But to
think that refuting a literalist form of Christianity means Christianity is
false is a mistake. If you spend all your time fighting those forms of
Christianity, you’re not getting any closer to the right answer. You’re just
spending your finite time meditating on one particular bad answer. Which,
depending on how harmful and prevalent it is, might be a good way to spend
your time – provided that you’re willing to make that trade-off.

> These sorts of puzzles are entertaining but of no deep import. The most they
> should be able to accomplish is to make the theist refine his definitions
> [of God], which means that they do not get to the heart of the dispute
> between theists and atheists. It is reasonable for the theist to respond to
> these sorts of puzzles by refining definitions so as to eliminate the
> puzzles, because in general, a good definition should (usually) not be
> contradictory. Thus, if someone succeeds in showing that the traditional
> definition of “God” is contradictory, that just shows that it’s a poor
> definition, and we should replace it with a definition that isn’t
> contradictory.
>
> There are limits to this. If the traditional conception of God is so
> confused that there is nothing anywhere close to it that is logically
> coherent, then we should just declare that there is no God. But if there is
> something in the neighborhood that is coherent, then we should interpret
> “God” as having one of the coherent meanings that is close to what is
> traditionally said about God. That’s because our purpose is to learn, not
> merely to score points against people. The way to learn is to address the
> most interesting defensible views, not to spend our time discussing
> trivially false ideas.

Growing up, I didn’t know much about the LDS Church. I heard it described as a
“cult” during the 2012 presidential election. Even as a good protestant, I
disagreed. After becoming an atheist a few years later, I still viewed
Mormonism as a breakaway sect of Christianity, though I shared the following
sentiment [with Sam Harris](https://www.samharris.org/blog/response-to-
controversy):

Strikingly, Mormons reject the notion of eternal conscious torment for non-
Christians. Universalism (or something like it) is the default view in the LDS
Church.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F04%2F04%2Fis-mormonism-more-plausible-than-other-forms-of-christianity%2F&signup_flow=account)

This is not “Christianity plus implausible stuff” – this is Christianity
_minus_ implausible stuff. Unless, that is, you consider eternal conscious
torment, creation _ex nihilo_ , and the baffling notion that our world was
created by a _perfect being_ to be valuable aspects of Christianity that
somehow increase its plausibility.

Rather than forwarding creation _ex nihilo_ , Mormons – along with many
atheists – believe the universe is eternal. For Latter-day Saints, God is a
part of nature rather than outside it. God organized our universe from pre-
existing material. Consequently, Mormons do not defend the kalam cosmological
argument.

> “Mormonism is objectively less credible than Christianity, because Mormons
> are committed to believing nearly all the implausible things that Christians
> believe plus many additional implausible things.”

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[argument from evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-from-
evil/), [atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheism vs mormonism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism-vs-
mormonism/), [atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[atheist vs mormon](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist-vs-
mormon/), [christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christian vs mormon](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian-vs-
mormon/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[christianity vs
mormonism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity-vs-
mormonism/), [counter
apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-apologetics/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/),
[harris](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/harris/),
[implausible](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/implausible/),
[lds](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/lds/), [lds
explained](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/lds-explained/),
[mormon](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mormon/),
[mormonism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mormonism/), [mormonism
explained](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mormonism-explained/),
[naturalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/naturalism/),
[naturalist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/naturalist/), [problem
of evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/problem-of-evil/),
[Religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religion/), [Sam
Harris](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/sam-harris/)

Due to their differences with other Christians regarding the nature of God,
Latter-day Saints don’t defend the ontological argument. Their rejection of
perfect being theism and their analysis of omnipotence (which effectively
renders Mormon God less powerful than Catholic and Protestant God) opens up
new avenues in responding to arguments from evil that are not available to
other Christians. For me, this is a pretty big deal, since arguments from evil
provide the best reasons for rejecting theism.

_Christianity plus a lot of weird, implausible things._ I think that’s an
accurate summation of how many view Mormonism. But I’ve come to believe that
it’s entirely mistaken.

Moreover, Latter-day Saints are on at least slightly better footing in making
design arguments, since the designer they posit has a greater basis in
experience relative to the supernatural, non-physical, maximally perfect
designer posited by other Christians.

Many of the shortcomings of the LDS worldview are shortcoming of all forms of
Christianity. For example, a literalist approach to the holy text will yield
numerous conflicts with history and science. (Many theists seem to think this
is a unique problem for Mormonism.) This is an important point if we’re
playing this game of “Which version of Christianity is the most plausible?” In
nearly every case, Mormonism is either on equal(ish) footing with other forms
of Christianity – and therefore no less plausible – or it has an advantage
over its Christian rivals.

Of course, Harris is correct in saying that Theory A is objectively more
plausible than Theory B if Theory B is just Theory A + a few additional
implausible claims. He’s wrong, however, in thinking that this maps on to
Christianity and Mormonism in the way he presents it. If anything, he has it
backwards.

Here’s my [interview with Tarik D. LaCour on
Mormonism](https://youtu.be/M3ShG06vJ2A), how it differs from other forms of
Christianity, and how Tarik’s views on scientism and empiricism factor into
his faith.

Mormons also believe in evolution, even the evolution (progress) of your
spirit. You can evolve in the next life to become a god.

Here’s a bonus advantage: The soul-building theodicy [makes for a better fit
within LDS theology](https://youtu.be/nCBD7q5FNe0?t=4184), especially if one
views God as the basis of all value.

What about pain? There are examples of negative states that don’t seem to
qualify as definitely painful. If you put your hand on a warm stove as it
gradually heats up, you’ll eventually start to feel pain, but when exactly? Is
there a precise moment when the stove goes from warm to hot, and when your
experience turns definitely painful? There is no precise threshold, and there
will be borderline cases where your experience doesn’t seem like it’s
definitely pain, but also not definitely _not_ pain. So, a borderline case of
experience? It is a borderline case of pain – a certain _type of_ experience.
But it’s not a borderline case between consciousness and unconsciousness,
which is what the vagueness argument is concerned with. There are many cases
in which it’s indeterminate _what_ a subject is feeling, but not _whether_
they’re feeling.

Vagueness arguments seem more supportive of panpsychism than dualism, since
panpsychism more easily accommodates our intuitions about vagueness. If
experience is sharp, why not just identify like with like?

> “The vagueness argument suggests panpsychism as one of the options that can
> accommodate the strong intuition that consciousness is sharp and determinate
> because it ties consciousness to fundamental physical entities.”
>
> Nino Kadić (2022)

If we remove one atom at a time from a given brain state, at some point, it
will be indeterminate whether or not the organism is still in that brain
state. Physical states of an organism’s brain and body admit of borderline
cases. If consciousness is physical, we would expect consciousness to follow
suit.

Surprisingly, Papineau goes on to reject the sharpness of consciousness,
despite admitting that he has trouble even imagining the alternative. He
maintains that the eventual appearance of consciousness must have been vague,
admitting of borderline cases. Given the earlier quotation, in which he seems
to understand why that can’t be so, his rejection sounds more than a little
odd. However, his primary motivation is that accepting non-vagueness would
rule out physicalism. The non-physicalist options present various difficulties
(only a couple of which he briefly raises before deeming them too hard to
solve). Even worse, the non-physicalist options are not physicalism(!), and
physicalism is undoubtedly true. He goes so far as to walk up to the line of
conceding that it’s impossible to conceive of a borderline state of
consciousness, and _yet he still asserts that they exist_. After all, if it
wasn’t so, physicalism would be wrong. Much like the trinity, the
inconceivable vagueness of consciousness is an awesome mystery.

The vagueness argument is concerned with the fact that there’s no wiggle room
between experience and non-experience, between the presence and absence of
feeling. All the putative examples of borderline cases fall short, usually
obviously so. So after all this trying and failing to describe an
indeterminate state between experience and non-experience, are we justified in
taking it to be impossible? To quote Tye, “Conceivability is defeasible
evidence for metaphysical possibility and inconceivability is defeasible
evidence for metaphysical impossibility.” So, we have defeasible support for
the claim that a genuine borderline case of consciousness is metaphysically
impossible. If physicalism is true, borderline cases of consciousness are
possible. Since they appear to be impossible, it follows that physicalism is
false.

When did consciousness first evolve? Was there a very first creature who broke
the pattern of insentience, feeling sensations and seeing light for the first
time in evolutionary history? Or did our capacity to experience the world
evolve gradually, like everything else? Phenomenal consciousness shouldn’t be
unique. We’d expect it to have evolved gradually, just as brains, eyes, and
cognitive abilities evolved gradually. Everything in biological evolution came
about little by little over time, so it’s unsurprising that the cumulative
products of natural selection admit of borderline cases. Even human beings are
subject to this vagueness: There was no first human, no sharp dividing line in
the continuum between “definitely human” and “definitely not a human.” But how
could this be the case with experiences, feelings, and sensations? I can see
how it’d be the case with particular types of experiences, but how could it be
the case with experience itself?

> “In seeking physical properties whose concepts are sharp, the obvious place
> to look is fundamental physics.”
>
> Michael Anthony (2006)

However, as the second premise of the argument claims, this does not seem
possible for consciousness. No matter how minimal a conscious experience is,
it seems impossible to characterize any case in which it is merely “kind of”
like something to be in that state. We cannot describe any borderline case of
consciousness. It may be vague whether something is a particular type of
experience – maybe it’s unclear whether it’s this or that shade of green – but
it is never vague whether something is an experience to begin with. Yes,
aspects of our conscious lives come in degrees – degrees of intensity,
richness, complexity – but the presence of experience itself is another
matter. It’s binary; there’s no conceptual room between “like nothing” and
“like something.” The contents of experience can be vague, fuzzy, and
indeterminate, but there’s a sharp line separating the presence and absence of
experience.

> “Suggestions for the physical grounds of consciousness include global
> workspace activity, neural oscillation frequencies, re-entrant neural loops
> … action-guiding mental representation, and so on. _If any theory along
> these lines is correct, however, there will inevitably be borderline cases
> of consciousness itself. (Emphasis added)_ Global activities and the like
> come in degrees, and so any sharp cut-off point specifying exactly when we
> have enough for consciousness would be arbitrary. The obvious implication is
> that some mental states are indeterminate between being conscious and not.”
>
> David Papineau (2022)

One reason it’s difficult to conclusively settle the question over where
consciousness exists in nature lies in the fact that phenomenal consciousness
– subjective experience – is publicly unobservable. Physical behavior, on the
other hand, _is_ publicly observable. The physical, material aspect of the
brain and body is accessible through our senses and scientific instruments,
while our inner lives remain elusively private. We can observe avoidance
behavior in worms, electrochemical activity in humans, and (crucially, for
neuroscience) verbal reports like “That hurts!” or “I’m seeing an orange cat
right now.” But your pain experience and orange experience is directly known
by you and you alone. (Earlier, I said _most_ people believe cats and dogs are
conscious. The reason it’s possible for some people to defend the idiotic
Cartesian notion that it’s like nothing to be a cat or dog – that they’re not
experiencing anything – is because experiences are private.) Here, whether or
not the privacy of experience counts against physicalism is not the point. The
public unobservability of consciousness pretty obviously makes it difficult to
determine _where_ consciousness exists in nature, which in turn multiplies the
difficulty of testing theories of consciousness.

Alternatively, maybe sleep is not a state in which one experiences nothing at
all – maybe the backdrop of consciousness is always present. It’s possible
that the boundary between sleep and wakefulness is vague _because_ experience
never disappears entirely. Many of the features of human consciousness go
offline during sleep. So, there could be borderline states between being
asleep and being awake, but it would be a matter of fading certain features of
consciousness, not a total cessation of consciousness itself.

> “…imagine that you are in a hospital bed feeling pain and that you can
> adjust a dial that controls the delivery of morphine to your body. As you do
> so, your pain becomes less intense, gradually transforming itself into a
> feeling of pleasure. In the middle of this process, there may well be
> experiences that are not easy to classify. Again, there is indeterminacy at
> such times as to what you are feeling, but there is no indeterminacy as to
> whether feeling continues to be present.” (2021)

This does not seem possible for experience, since there is always a fact of
the matter about whether an organism is a conscious being or an insentient
mechanism. Sensation is present in the earthworm or it isn’t, regardless of
what anyone believes about the earthworm, or what we’re able to discover about
it. Besides, what is “borderline case of experience” supposed to mean? A
proto-sensation that _kind of_ feels like something? If it’s “kind of like
something,” then it’s like something. The lights may be dim, but there is a
fact of the matter about whether it’s like _something_ or like _nothing_. Of
course, the contents of consciousness can be vague. We can be unsure of _what_
we’re feeling, or unsure of whether some particular experience falls into one
category or another, but it’s never vague whether experience is present in the
first place. Whether earthworms are conscious is uncertain, but there must be
a fact of the matter about whether it is like _nothing at all_ to be a worm or
_anything other than_ nothing at all.

> “Neurons are complex physical entities with diverse components. Each neuron
> has a cell body, dendrites, and an axon. Electrical impulses come in along
> the dendrites and go out along the axon. Imagine removing atoms one by one
> from a given neuron. Eventually, as one does so, there will be no neuron
> left. But along the way, there will surely be a range of borderline
> cases—entities that are neither definitely neurons nor definitely not
> neurons. So, the property of being a neuronal oscillation is vague. It
> admits of borderline cases. In general, neurophysiological properties are
> highly complex. The idea that the relevant neural properties for
> consciousness are sharp is extremely implausible.”
>
> Michael Tye (2021)

One complication here is memory. I often forget my dreams, and am entirely
unable to recall what I dreamt hours after waking, even though I could
remember for the first few minutes after waking up. Was I conscious the entire
time I was asleep, and just don’t remember it? I was certainly conscious for
some of it, since dream states are experiential states. Yet, I often forget
what I dreamt and _that_ I dreamt in the first place. Why couldn’t it be the
case that a dim glow of consciousness persists as long as I’m alive? Memory is
a fairly high-level feature of animal consciousness, and it’s easy to
conceptually separate experience and memory. It’s possible that there’s no
_experiential_ cutoff, sharp or vague, between sleep and wakefulness. This
would allow us to hold that the boundary between being asleep and being awake
is vague. _Other_ features of our minds come online and go offline, and the
contents of our minds change dramatically, but we can’t rule out the idea that
there’s a light that never goes out completely.

On reflection it seems hard to imagine anything other than a bright borderline
between wholly non-experiential reality and experiential reality. Experiences
are mental states such that there’s something it is like subjectively to
undergo them. It might be indeterminate _what_ you’re feeling, but not
_whether_ you’re feeling. The transition from feeling nothing to feeling
something couldn’t have been gradual: As soon as it’s not nothing, it’s
something. No matter how minimal a conscious experience is, if it’s “like
something” to exist – anything at all – it’s no longer like nothing at all.
There is no space between these two poles for indeterminacy to live. (We’ll
take a closer look at putative cases of borderline consciousness, e.g. states
between sleep and wakefulness, experiences that fall indeterminately between
pain and not-pain, and so on. None of these are genuine borderline cases of
consciousness in the relevant sense, and we’ll unpack them more later on.)
There’s always a fact of the matter about whether it’s like something for a
creature or like nothing at all. In other words, phenomenal consciousness is
sharp.

When does the day become the night? Well, there is no _exact_ moment. When
does stubble become a beard? When does someone become famous? There is no fact
of the matter; there is no precise threshold. Take tables and chairs: we could
gradually deform a table until it is vague whether or not the object counts as
a table. So, tables admit borderline cases. At some point in our gradual
deformation, it will be vague or indeterminate or simply a matter of
convention whether _this_ object is still a table.

> 1\. If physicalism is true, borderline cases of consciousness are possible.
>
> 2\. Borderline cases of consciousness are not possible.
>
> 3\. Therefore, physicalism is false.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F12%2F16%2Fthe-vagueness-argument-against-physicalism%2F&signup_flow=account)

At first glance, the border between conscious organisms and non-conscious
organisms seems vague and fuzzy. There’s no obvious way of resolving the
question of which creatures are or are not conscious. Most people agree that
cats and dogs have mental states – they experience things – and so are
conscious. But fewer will agree that it’s like anything to be a fish (even
though they have a nervous system and eyes, and I’m not sure what they’d be
doing with them other than _seeing_ things). Fewer still would entertain the
idea that earthworms have any inner life. But who’s to say it isn’t _like
something_ for the worm who squirms from the wet grass over to the sidewalk?
Maybe they’re driven to behave in this way by negative experiences. After all,
worms possess a (very rudimentary) nervous system and seem to be exhibiting
purposeful behavior.

> “We now have an argument for anti-physicalism that is independent of the
> discussion on Nagel, Jackson, and Chalmers, that relies on the very
> intuitive notion that the concept of ‘conscious state’ is sharp, and which
> suggests that one possible upshot is a theory that binds consciousness to
> fundamental physics, such as panpsychism.”
>
> Nino Kadić (2022)

I would say the same holds for coming out of general anesthesia, as well as
other supposed borderline states between sleep and wakefulness. Imagine a
patient coming out of a coma. It doesn’t seem unreasonable to think that there
is a definite moment when the lights turn back on, which then broaden in scope
and increase in intensity. If that’s the case, though, consciousness is sharp.

What do I mean by consciousness? Roughly, I’ll be following how Michael Tye
uses the term in his book, _Vagueness and the Evolution of Consciousness_ :
“Consciousness, for present purposes, is experience. Experiences are mental
states such that there is inherently something it is like subjectively to
undergo them. Examples are feeling pain, feeling an itch, visualizing an
elephant, experiencing anger, and feeling fearful.” I’ll be using a few terms
interchangeably – subjective experience, phenomenal consciousness, “what-
it’s-like-ness,” sentience, sensation. For our purposes in this episode, when
I say “consciousness,” I mean the qualitative, phenomenal character of
consciousness: the thing that makes the hard problem hard; the thing without
which it wouldn’t count as a subjective experience at all.

Not all physical things are vague: _Fundamental_ physical things are sharp.
What could it mean for the fundamental __ level of reality to be vague? If
something admits of borderline cases, that only seems to suggest that it’s
non-fundamental – that it’s composed of something _more_ fundamental. The
fundament must be sharp in a way that a higher-level physical phenomenon is
not. Isn’t it interesting that consciousness has this feature that seems to be
shared only by fundamental entities?

Though I’ve been arguing that consciousness is sharp, I don’t think there was
any exact moment when this threshold was actually met. I’m not arguing that a
sharp line was crossed at some mysterious point in evolutionary history. Any
candidate would seem arbitrary. The world is a strange place, but presumably
we’d want some kind of reason that the sharp line was drawn _there_ and not
over there (e.g., at nervous systems with n neurons instead of n+1 neurons).
Any explanation of consciousness that terminates in brute arbitrariness is not
going to seem awfully compelling.

Describing a genuine borderline case of experience feels a bit like trying to
describe a borderline case of “something-ness.” What is the borderline state
between something and nothing? How could there only _kind of_ be something
without it counting as something (i.e., not nothing)? We can rule out the
possibility of borderline cases of experience on the basis of their
inconceivability.

If a borderline, indeterminate case of consciousness is impossible, our
trouble in determining where consciousness exists in nature – whether or not a
given system is conscious – comes down to our epistemic __ limitations. Our
limited epistemic access to other minds is the cause of any indeterminacy, not
the nature of consciousness itself.

> “…if consciousness does not admit of borderline cases, then we will have to
> suppose that some utterly precise micro-level change—down to an exact
> arrangement of particles—marked the first appearance of consciousness (or
> the change from non-conscious to conscious embryo/foetus), and it is going
> to seem arbitrary that it was that utterly precise change that was
> responsible for this significant change in nature.”
>
> Panpsychism, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

> “ _What_ I experience is initially indefinite and impoverished. As I become
> fully awake, _what_ I experience gets richer and richer. But this doesn’t
> show that experience or consciousness itself has borderline cases.”
>
> Michael Tye (2021)

> “…is it consciousness itself that is indeterminate, or just our ability to
> decide about it? It isn’t easy to make sense of the idea that consciousness
> itself is vague. Either the light is on, we feel, or it isn’t. The glow of
> consciousness might be dim in some cases, but a dim light is still a
> definite light, not a borderline light-or-non-light. And on reflection it
> seems hard to imagine a genuinely borderline case of consciousness. This
> suggests that any indeterminacy about marginal cases of consciousness must
> lie in our limited epistemic access to the minds at issue, not in those
> minds themselves.”
>
> David Papineau (2022)

If consciousness is sharp, and fundamental reality can’t be vague, then we
seem to have some support for the notion that we should place consciousness at
fundamental reality, rather than try to defend the unintelligible idea that
consciousness can be vague. Superficially, we have a conflicting intuition
that consciousness comes in degrees, but as discussed earlier, this isn’t a
threat to the vagueness argument properly understood. Further, panpsychism
easily accommodates both intuitions: It allows us to coherently hold that
consciousness is sharp (since it ties consciousness to fundamental physical
entities), _and_ that consciousness comes in degrees (since pre-existing
conscious material changes in complexity and richness as it evolves). The
vagueness argument is primarily an argument against physicalism. It may point
suggestively towards panpsychism, but that’s an added bonus.

> “True, there are ‘half-conscious’ experiences, such as the first moments of
> waking. … But, on reflection, even these special experiences seem to qualify
> unequivocally as conscious, in the sense that they are like something,
> rather than nothing”
>
> David Papineau (1993)

This is puzzlingly common. The materialist critics of vagueness arguments tend
to reject the sharpness of phenomenal consciousness, despite the fact that
some of them concede that they cannot describe or imagine a genuine borderline
case of consciousness.

This is why I mentioned coming out of sleep and general anesthesia first. It’s
not unreasonable to think that there is a moment coming out of general
anesthesia that the light turns back on, which then broadens in scope and
increases in its intensity. Those who would appeal to such examples as cases
of borderline consciousness should know that their way of reading that case is
not the only way. (Not to mention, their way has the unique disadvantage of
invoking something that seems impossible to conceive of.) When we cross from
sleep to wakefulness, one might hold that there _is_ an exact moment we wake
up, with the indistinct contents of consciousness gradually becoming less
fuzzy and indeterminate.

Tagged [argument against
physicalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-against-
physicalism/),
[consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness/),
[consciousness
sharp](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness-sharp/),
[consciousness
vague](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness-vague/),
[dualism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/dualism/),
[goff](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/goff/),
[materialism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/materialism/),
[Michael tye](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/michael-tye/), [nino
kadic](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/nino-kadic/),
[panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/panpsychism/),
[Papineau](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/papineau/),
[philosophy](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/philosophy/),
[philosophy of mind](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/philosophy-of-
mind/),
[physicalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/physicalism/),
[sharp](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/sharp/),
[sharpness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/sharpness/),
[vague](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vague/), [vagueness and the
evolution of
consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-and-the-
evolution-of-consciousness/), [vagueness
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument/),
[vagueness argument against
physicalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument-
against-physicalism/), [vagueness argument for
panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument-
for-panpsychism/)

The motivation for the first premise lies in the vagueness of non-fundamental
physical phenomena, especially in the biological world, which is where
consciousness is typically assumed to have arisen. Complex, non-fundamental
physical states admit of borderline cases. So, if consciousness is just a kind
of physical state, it follows that consciousness should also admit of
borderline cases. Even if we scale down, past the higher-level activity of the
brain, and zoom in to neuronal activity, vagueness is inescapable even at this
more fine-grained level of resolution:

The trouble of figuring out _where_ consciousness exists in nature – whether
or not a given system is conscious – could come down to our limited access to
other minds. Or perhaps the apparent indeterminacy is a reflection of the real
nature of minds – consciousness is actually vague. Either our epistemic
limitations produced by the privacy of consciousness result in indeterminacy,
or (inclusive or) consciousness is actually vague, which means that there is
genuine indeterminacy in addition to our epistemic limitations.

Here’s another way of putting the argument. Physicalists often talk about
“emergence” in a weak sense: Biology emerges from chemistry; chemistry emerges
from physics; and so on. There’s a smooth continuum from fundamental physical
reality to the biological realm. And just as H2O molecules emerge from the
right combination of atoms, so experience emerges from brain activity. The
problem is that the products of weak emergence – complex physical states in
the biological realm – admit borderline cases. States of an organism’s brain
and body are vague. So if experience is just a complex physical state, it
should be similarly vague. But by virtue of being conscious creatures, we can
reflect and see that experience is sharp. What we’d expect to see if
physicalism is true is _not_ a sharp phenomenon emerging at the biological
level. In short, the products of weak emergence in the biological realm admit
of borderline cases. Since experience doesn’t, it’s hard to see how it could
be the product of weak emergence.

Let’s take a look at a few of the commonly-proposed examples of borderline
cases of consciousness. (Most of these are discussed in Michael Tye’s book,
_Vagueness and the Evolution of Consciousness_.) Say you’re waking up from a
deep sleep. In that very first moment of wakefulness, you’ll be groggy and
half-conscious. Isn’t this a borderline case of consciousness?

On the other hand, physical states admit borderline cases. If we remove one
atom at a time from a given brain state, it will eventually be vague or
indeterminate whether or not the organism is still in that brain state.
Physical states of a subject’s brain admit of borderline cases. So if
consciousness is just a kind of physical state, then we’d expect consciousness
to follow suit. But since it seems impossible that there could be a borderline
case of consciousness – it’s either like something for a creature or like
nothing at all – then we have reason to think that physicalism is false.

There are other examples offered by critics of the argument which also miss
the point, mostly having to do with whether an experience falls into this or
that category, but the intuition of sharpness seems to be fairly common
amongst physicalists and non-physicalists alike. Many of us also have an
apparently conflicting intuition that consciousness comes in degrees, but this
isn’t a threat to the vagueness argument properly understood. Just as I have
no issue describing sleep as “unconsciousness” – since “consciousness” denotes
more than just experience – there’s no problem with claiming that
consciousness comes in degrees. Consciousness _can_ come in degrees in nearly
every sense of how people use the term consciousness, save for one – the one
that tends to interest me. It’s obvious that in some sense, I’m “more
conscious” than my cats. I’m _conscious of_ more things than they are, and
enjoy a richer inner life than they do (e.g., complex language is a feature of
my inner life but not theirs). I’m also conscious to a greater degree after
I’ve had coffee than just after I’ve woken up, even though both states were
like something for me. I think it’s easy to parse out what we’re getting at
when we say things like “He stumbled around the room, half-conscious” or
“Humans are conscious to a higher degree than non-human animals,” and so on.
The widespread intuitions underlying these statements don’t conflict with the
vagueness argument. There’s no issue with “degrees” of consciousness in
practically every sense of the term, even though experience itself is binary.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F01%2F01%2Fthe-vagueness-argument%2F&signup_flow=account)

I tend to think a more precise definition of consciousness would make the edge
cases easier to identify. Of course, there are many possible definitions. I
think that fact shows where the real vagueness lies, in the concept of
consciousness itself.

The problem is that the products of weak emergence – complex physical states
in the biological realm – admit of borderline cases. States of an organism’s
brain and body are vague. So if experience is just a complex physical state,
it should be similarly vague. But by virtue of being conscious creatures, we
can reflect and see that experience is sharp. What we’d expect to see if
physicalism is true is _not_ a sharp phenomenon emerging at the biological
level.

Here is an abridged version of [my post on the vagueness argument against
physicalism.](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/2022/12/16/the-vagueness-
argument-against-physicalism/)

Try to imagine the dawn of consciousness in evolutionary history. The
cumulative products of biological evolution (e.g. eyes and brains) came about
gradually, little by little over time. But it seems that the transition from
feeling nothing to feeling something couldn’t have been similarly gradual: As
soon as it’s not nothing, it’s something. There is no space between these two
poles for indeterminacy to get a foothold. No matter how minimal a conscious
experience is, if it’s “like something” to exist – anything at all – it’s not
like nothing at all.

Of course, it can be indeterminate _what_ a subject is feeling, but not
_whether_ they’re feeling. The existence of experience itself is what’s
relevant to the vagueness argument. There doesn’t appear to be any wiggle room
between the existence and non-existence of experience, between the presence
and absence of feeling. What exactly is “borderline case of consciousness”
supposed to mean? A proto-sensation that _kind of_ feels like something? If
it’s “kind of like something,” then it’s like something.

Describing a genuine borderline case of experience feels a bit like trying to
describe a borderline case of “something-ness.” What is the borderline state
between something and nothing? How could there only _kind of_ be something
without counting it as something (i.e., not nothing)? Whether simple creatures
like earthworms are conscious is uncertain, but there must be a fact of the
matter about whether it is like _nothing at all_ to be a worm or _anything
other than_ nothing at all. We cannot describe any borderline case of
consciousness. Since inconceivability is defeasible evidence for metaphysical
impossibility, we have defeasible support for the claim that a genuine
borderline case of consciousness is metaphysically impossible.

> “Conceivability is defeasible evidence for metaphysical possibility and
> inconceivability is defeasible evidence for metaphysical impossibility.”
>
> Michael Tye (2021)

Here’s another way of putting the argument. Physicalists sometimes talk about
“emergence” in a weak sense: Biology emerges from chemistry; chemistry emerges
from physics; and so on. There’s allegedly a smooth continuum from fundamental
physical reality to the biological realm. And just as H2O molecules emerge
from the right combination of atoms, so experience emerges from brain
activity.

Tagged [consciousness
sharp](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness-sharp/),
[consciousness
vague](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness-vague/),
[evolution of
consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolution-of-
consciousness/), [Michael
tye](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/michael-tye/),
[panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/panpsychism/),
[vagueness and the evolution of
consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-and-the-
evolution-of-consciousness/), [vagueness
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument/),
[vagueness argument against
physicalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument-
against-physicalism/), [vagueness argument for
panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vagueness-argument-
for-panpsychism/)

The products of weak emergence in the biological realm admit of borderline
cases. Since experience doesn’t, it’s hard to see how it could be the product
of weak emergence.

What is meant by “consciousness”? I’ll be following how Michael Tye uses the
term in his book, _Vagueness and the Evolution of Consciousness_ :

I think where it starts to become problematic for me is the definition of
consciousness, Nagel’s “something it is like”, which itself seems vague. It
doesn’t really provide anything with which we can use to scrutinize the claim
that consciousness is sharp, since it’s not clear what exactly it is that’s
sharp. The examples (pain, itch, anger, fear) don’t seem to help because they
also appear to be examples of things later noted can be indeterminate.

> “Consciousness, for present purposes, is experience. Experiences are mental
> states such that there is inherently something it is like subjectively to
> undergo them. Examples are feeling pain, feeling an itch, visualizing an
> elephant, experiencing anger, and feeling fearful.” (2021)

The motivation for the first premise lies in the
[vagueness](https://1000wordphilosophy.com/2019/03/11/vagueness/) of physical
phenomena, especially in the biological world, which is where consciousness is
typically assumed to have arisen. If we remove one atom at a time from brain
state B, it will eventually be vague or indeterminate whether the organism is
still in B. Complex, non-fundamental physical states admit of borderline
cases. So, if consciousness is just a kind of complex physical state, we’d
expect consciousness to follow suit. If it seems impossible that there could
be a borderline case of consciousness, then we would have reason to think
physicalism is false.

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [draper](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/draper/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/), [inspiring
philosophy](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/inspiring-philosophy/),
[meager moral fruit](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-
fruit/), [meager moral
fruits](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruits/),
[meager moral fruits
argument](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/meager-moral-fruits-
argument/), [philosophy of
religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/philosophy-of-religion/),
[real atheology](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/real-atheology/),
[Religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religion/),
[theism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/theism/), [tippling
philosopher](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/tippling-philosopher/)

Ben Watkins of Real Atheology joined me to discuss the meager moral fruits
argument, a few objections to the argument, and why we’re interested in it in
the first place.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F12%2F24%2Fmeager-moral-fruits%2F&signup_flow=account)

I wanted to say that one hesitation (possibly the only hesitation) I feel in
presenting this argument is that I’m not giving the religious believers in my
life who have been a positive moral witness their due. I sometimes feel a
tinge of guilt when I defend this argument, since I can be misunderstood as
saying that there are no Christians who I respect or look up to as sources of
moral wisdom. That is not at all true. So I have two things to say on this,
one negative and one positive. The negative is that this concern, framed as an
objection to the argument, is not any good. It should be obvious that claims
made about Christianity as a whole don’t reflect on every single individual
Christian, just as claims about the United States don’t reflect on every
individual U.S. citizen. One could say something true about the United States,
yet it would be trivially easy to find ten people who seemed to
straightforwardly disconfirm whatever claim was made. On a strictly
argumentative level, this is totally insignificant. But on an interpersonal
level, it’s highly significant. There are Christians in my life who are wise,
intelligent, moral people. Some have been a positive witness in my life, even
though I don’t agree with them about every minute ethical issue. (Though some
of them I do agree with very often.) In fact, if more Christians were like
them, I would never have offered this argument to begin with. The last thing I
want to do is give the impression that I have anything other than love and
respect for these religious believers in my life, or imply that their
influence hasn’t been positive. I’m overwhelmingly grateful to have them in my
life. I can honestly say that if more Christians were like them, the odds that
I would be a Christian would increase dramatically.

It’s not about having the punishment _undone_ , which is impossible. The
wrongfully imprisoned can’t get those years of their life back. The asymmetry
between imprisonment and the death penalty lies in our inability to _bring the
punishment to an end_ and to try to make things right for the wrongfully
convicted. While those who have been imprisoned can be freed and paid damages,
those who have been killed cannot have their punishment brought to an end or
remedied. And though you might think that the _families_ of the wrongfully
killed could receive damages, that’s not equivalent to compensating the one
who was wrongfully convicted. There’s no chance of remedy _for them_ , because
the enthusiasts for the death penalty had them killed.

Hey, here’s your chance! Here’s your chance to be the unstoppable badass you
imagine yourself to be! So many advocates of capital punishment are this man,
with a gulf between their self-image and what they actually are. Many of us
know guys like this, with body armor and guns, playing dress-up. For them,
it’s a costume party for adults. Most if not all of these people advocate the
death penalty (because they’re so incredibly badass). No, they’re not soft!
That’s why they support _the death penalty_. That’s why they want…someone else
to do the thing that they don’t have the courage, loyalty, and strength to do
themselves. Some don’t possess these qualities, and seem to think that
advocating capital punishment proves that they don’t lack them. The sickly
reality of the death penalty, however, is far removed from what these people
seem to have in mind. They pretend to have those qualities of courage,
loyalty, and strength, completely unearned, while a faceless employee of the
state carries out sanitized, impersonal “revenge” that’s been stripped of
every virtue.

Benjamin Yost defends “the principle of remedy” in his treatise against the
death penalty. This is, according to Yost, a fundamental tenet of liberal
political morality. We _know_ the state will make mistakes, and an institution
sensitive to justice must be prepared to remedy its mistakes. Execution,
however, is irreversible. It _can’t_ be remedied, and consequently falls short
of this ideal. There’s a finality to death that renders it disanalogous to
imprisonment. If a prisoner is discovered to be innocent, as thousands have
been in the wake of forensic advancements – not to mention moral progress in
eliminating unjust or nonsensical laws – they can be freed and paid damages.
Those who have been wrongly killed, however, cannot be resurrected.

[It took 10 minutes to convict 14-year-old George Stinney Jr. It took 70 years
after his execution to exonerate him –
WaPo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2014/12/18/the-rush-
job-conviction-of-14-year-old-george-stinney-exonerated-70-years-after-
execution/)

> “If a liberal state must abstain from unjust coercion, it must also endeavor
> to alleviate all those illicit burdens it does impose … To fail to try to
> put things aright evinces a callousness to injustice that, if not equivalent
> in countenancing the original wrongful act, stands in close proximity.”
>
> _Benjamin Yost, Against Capital Punishment_

Likewise, it does not follow from “Some people do not deserve to live” that
“The state should end the lives of some of its citizens.” Ask yourself how
much you trust the police, the court system, and the state generally. Are they
the body who should be given this power over life and death? Who should be
permitted to kill us with impunity?

> “‘Bernard, as you know, I’ve been against the death penalty all of my life.
> I don’t think it’s the state’s business to end the lives of its citizens, no
> matter how heinous their actions. And I’ll tell you something else: if Kitty
> had been raped and murdered, I wouldn’t want the man executed by lethal
> injection fifteen years later, after dozens of appeals and legal challenges.
> I’d want to track down that son of a bitch before the law could get ahold of
> him and kill him myself with my bare hands. I’d think it was my job to do
> it, not some district attorney or judge or jury of twelve people who didn’t
> even know her. Maybe society can’t allow that to happen, but that’s what I’d
> want to do in that situation.’

In his book _[Why Honor Matters](https://www.amazon.com/Why-Honor-Matters-
Tamler-Sommers/dp/0465098878)_ , Tamler Sommers writes that while vengeance is
“hard to contain, hard to get right”, it’s certainly not always immoral.
(Interestingly, the emotions behind the desire for revenge are absent only in
those who we’d likely regard with suspicion and disgust.) In book 34 of
Genesis, a young woman named Dinah is kidnapped by a powerful man and raped.
While her two brothers are grieved and angry, their father, Jacob, seems to be
neither, and is primarily concerned with avoiding violent conflict and how he
might profit from being paid damages by his daughter’s rapist. At great
personal risk, the two brothers disobey their father and kill their sister’s
tormentor. (And a lot of other people. It’s the Old Testament.) As Sommers
explains,

These practical concerns do not cut to the heart of the matter, but it is a
fact that no man-made guilt-determining structure will be without flaws – it
will determine guilt imperfectly. (“Imperfectly” is a hell of a euphemism
here.) So how comfortable are you with having innocent people killed, like
[George Stinney](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Stinney)? Once again, it
is an unavoidable fact that a defense of the death penalty in practice means
defending the murder of innocent people at the hands of the state. The murder
of [14-year-old George Stinney](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-
mix/wp/2014/12/18/the-rush-job-conviction-of-14-year-old-george-stinney-
exonerated-70-years-after-execution/) could have been avoided. Unfortunately,
he will not be the last victim of death penalty apologists.

This requirement of certainty – in addition to ignoring the fact that this is
effectively the standard already – does nothing to undermine other ways in
which the accused could be unworthy of capital punishment. We could be certain
that the defendant was guilty of stealing a spoon. Of course, they wouldn’t
deserve to be hanged for this offense, though that’s exactly what happened to
13-year-old Andrew Brenning in 1801. As Joshua Marquis – an advocate of the
death penalty – admits, many of those presently on death row do not deserve
the death penalty. The correct determination of guilt is no guarantee that the
offense will warrant capital punishment. It was the case in 1801, and it’s
still the case today.

Do some people deserve to die? Should there be a death penalty? Contrary to
what some proponents of capital punishment believe, these are not two ways of
asking the same question.

Even when everything goes as it’s designed – when a person guilty of a heinous
crime is sentenced to death – the virtues of revenge are absent. Advocates of
capital punishment seem to have something quite lofty in their minds, but
their self-image is delusionally inaccurate. The clinical and cowardly way in
which life is being taken is enough to drain any remaining respect I might’ve
had for the death penalty system.

First, in no way does it follow from “Some people deserve the death penalty”
that “ _This_ organization should be permitted to determine guilt and carry
out executions.” There’s a chasm between the judgment that some people
plausibly do not deserve to live and the judgment that a given body should
have the legitimacy to determine guilt and kill people based on its
assessments. Imagine I gave an impassioned defense of the death penalty, and
concluded by saying that the power to perform executions should be in the
hands of the Lincoln Elementary School PTA. The parent-teacher association
from an elementary school in southwest Michigan should be the arbiters of
guilt and death. After all, capital punishment is justified! Necessary, even!

While the first statement is at least defensible, the latter is a joke.
There’s an obvious asymmetry here, because saving innocent people is more
important than killing guilty people. The staunchest defender of capital
punishment wouldn’t appeal to a few worthy recipients if they were the
_exception_. Unless the vast majority are guilty, even they would lose their
stomach for supporting the policy in practice. So, we already agree that
preserving innocent life is _far_ more important than justifiably killing the
few who deserve it. Yet, they have a much higher tolerance for killing
innocent people than we do.

Arguing that some people deserve to die is not sufficient to show that any
particular organization should have the power and legitimacy to carry out
executions.

Most of us are naturally drawn into _some_ stories of revenge, fictional or
not, and repelled by others. What explains this distinction in many cases is
not a blanket condemnation or affirmation of revenge. I think it has more to
do with those conditions Sommers identifies. For example, in the summer of
2014, three Israeli settlers drove through East Jerusalem looking to avenge
the deaths of three other Israelis in the West Bank. The settlers’ were
looking for someone “lightweight,” who could be easily targeted. They came
across a young Palestinian named Mohammad, sixteen years old, and threw him in
their car before speeding off to a more remote area. The three settlers beat
the teenager to death and then set him on fire. Although they attempted to
destroy all the evidence, they were quickly caught and convicted of murder. As
Sommers explains,

Sommers, in the light of his more general defense of our moral intuitions
concerning honor and dishonor, offers a novel argument against the death
penalty at the end of the fifth chapter of his book. He doesn’t try to argue
that revenge killing is always impermissible. Quite the contrary – there are
virtuous qualities of revenge.

The abolition of the death penalty, say its apologists, would involve a
genuine moral cost: Those who deserve execution will walk free. But granting
that this is a genuine evasion of justice doesn’t mean it’s the _only_
consideration we need to factor in. So, John Wayne Gacy is killed by lethal
injection instead of dying in prison. Great. But is that worth George Stinney?
The moral side of my case rests on the idea that saving innocent lives is far
more important than ending those of the guilty. Killing those who deserve to
die is just not as important as saving those who do not deserve to die.

Proponents of capital punishment too often burn their energy zealously
defending claims that I would not dispute. They’ll recount grisly stories,
highlighting some of the darkest chapters of human existence, then throw up
their hands as if it’s just plain obvious that this person deserves to die.
But this is not where the conflict lies.

Of course, those who (at least profess to) think there’s nothing good about
revenge won’t be moved by this one way or the other. For those of us who see
something _good_ about revenge – some forms of revenge, that is – you have to
ask yourself if its virtues are present in our death penalty system.

Since the application of the death penalty will inevitably be morally
arbitrary in some cases – either due to the morally arbitrary nature of the
laws themselves, the enforcement of the law, or the imperfect determination of
guilt – we cannot have the death penalty without murdering innocents. Since
saving innocent life is far more important than ending the lives of the
guilty, this should dissuade us from maintaining a death-penalty system.

Dukakis replied, “No, I don’t, Bernard, and I think you know that I’ve opposed
the death penalty during all of my life. I don’t see any evidence that it’s a
deterrent, and I think there are better and more effective ways to deal with
violent crime. We’ve done so in my own state, and it’s one of the reasons why
we have had the biggest drop in crime of any industrial state in America, why
we have the lowest murder rate of any industrial state in America.” After the
election, the conventional wisdom held that any presidential candidate opposed
to the death penalty was unelectable. But, as Sommers argues,

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F12%2F07%2Fwhy-i-support-abolition-of-the-death-penalty%2F&signup_flow=account)

He begins with an illustration from the 1988 presidential debates, in which
Michael Dukakis, leading the polls at the time, is widely believed to have
fumbled an answer so spectacularly that it cost him the election. Moderator
Bernard Shaw asked, “If [your wife] Kitty Dukakis were raped and murdered,
would you favor an irrevocable death penalty for the killer?”

> “The death penalty system in the US is applied in an unfair and unjust
> manner against people, largely dependent on how much money they have, the
> skill of their attorneys, race of the victim and where the crime took
> place.”
>
> _The Case Against the Death Penalty, The American Civil Liberties Union_

Earlier, we talked about why merely justifying the idea that some people
deserve to die is insufficient to justify the death penalty system. Likewise,
defending the permissibility of revenge when terrible wrongs have been
committed is insufficient to justify the death penalty system.

The other version of this objection is a moral claim about justice: “We’re
doing right by the victims in our execution of the criminal.” And as I’ve been
trying to say, I don’t really dispute this. Some people deserve to die. I do,
however, think that taking an innocent life is a major countervailing
consideration. In fact, it’s often the offense that landed the criminal in
this position to begin with! If we were really horrified by the perversity of
killing an innocent person – extinguishing the life of one who truly does not
deserve it – then shouldn’t we be horrified at the prospect of doing it
ourselves?

Their dignity? If this was the only reason to oppose the death penalty, I
would unequivocally support it. I think some people do not deserve to live –
we would certainly not be doing wrong by a sadistic murderer in killing them.
All this to say that I’m the ideal audience for advocates of the death
penalty! Their typical arguments don’t sway me because _none of that_ is
sufficient to legitimize state-sanctioned capital punishment or overcome the
considerations I’ve raised. Maybe some of those considerations have been
slightly unorthodox, but even some of the more common arguments against
capital punishment can withstand the predictable barrage of death penalty
apologetics:

Tagged [abolish the death
penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/abolish-the-death-
penalty/), [aclu](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aclu/), [against
capital punishment](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/against-
capital-punishment/), [against the death
penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/against-the-death-
penalty/), [amnesty
international](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/amnesty-
international/),
[arguments](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments/), [arguments
against capital
punishment](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments-against-
capital-punishment/), [arguments against the death
penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments-against-the-
death-penalty/), [Benjamin
yost](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/benjamin-yost/), [capital
punishment](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/capital-punishment/),
[death penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/death-penalty/),
[debate](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debate/), [George
stinney](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/george-stinney/), [Joshua
marquis](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/joshua-marquis/), [oppose
the death penalty](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/oppose-the-
death-penalty/),
[prageru](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/prageru/), [tamler
sommers](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/tamler-sommers/)

Even granting that one might deserve to die, that doesn’t mean that every way
of going about it is just as good as any other way. Some stories of revenge
killings, fictional and non-fictional, possess virtues such that many (if not
most) people can’t help but feel at least a tinge of admiration. But what’s
honorable about impersonal capital punishment from a third-party who didn’t
know the victims? Death by lethal injection years after the crime at the hands
of a faceless employee is a far cry from the invigorating stories of revenge.
Where’s the bravery? Or courage, or risk-taking, or strength, or loyalty?
_None_ of that is present. The reality of the death penalty isn’t that it’s
excessively cruel, but that it’s a cowardly, sanitized, impersonal,
embarrassing husk of what its proponents undeservedly claim to embody.

If one were to bet on my position on the death penalty based on some of my
other views, they’d probably guess wrong. I believe in free will; I think
human beings are responsible for their actions; and I’m not opposed to
retribution in all cases; I think there are virtuous qualities to revenge; and
I think some people deserve to die. Further, the more common arguments against
the death penalty, to me, have little to no import:

The opponents of capital punishment seem to be more clear-eyed about the
imperfect and morally arbitrary nature of the state’s process of determining
guilt.

Of course, no one in their right mind would offer unconditional support for
any and all tales of vengeance: “…honorable avengers demonstrate virtues like
bravery, loyalty, and integrity. They take risks and accept responsibility for
their actions.” (p.146)

One version of this objection is a moral claim about just deserts. The other
is an empirical claim about the deterrent effects of capital punishment.
First, let’s deal with the easier of the two: the death penalty is not an
effective deterrent. It has no public safety benefit.

Even the defenders of capital punishment could be swayed by altering the ratio
of guilty:innocent executions. They’ll make it known that they’re willing to
have an innocent person killed here and there if it means stacking up a pile
of others who deserve it. Maybe they’re comfortable with one in a thousand, or
one in a hundred, but one in ten? Thirty percent? Forty percent? When does
saving the innocent countervail the punishment of the guilty? What if we had
to kill ninety-nine innocent people in order to kill one person who deserved
it? I think any morally normal person would agree that that would be
unacceptable. So how many innocent people are you, the defender of the death
penalty, comfortable with killing? How much blood on your hands is too much?

What people like Marquis don’t seem to realize is that this is _inevitable_.
(If they do understand this, then it follows that they’re consciously
defending a _pro tanto_ morally arbitrary system of ending human lives.) Even
if we eliminate the _current_ sources of arbitrariness in our justice system,
new ones will surely replace them. Any cursory glance at the history of
capital punishment should assure us of this. Whether it’s the laws themselves,
the application and enforcement of the laws, or the determination of guilt,
there will be unjust killings.

The protection of innocent people is at the center of my anti-death penalty
position. One reason it seems so obvious to me that protecting innocent lives
is _far_ more important than doling out capital punishment is the contrast
between these two moral statements:

_“Oh, you say you value innocent life, up there on your high horse, yet you’ve
forgotten about the real victims. It’s not the people sitting on death row.
Many of those people_ are _guilty, and they_ did _commit heinous crimes. What
about their victims? Or are you only concerned with the people on death row?”_

[Against Capital Punishment by Benjamin Yost, Reviewed by Jeffrey Howard –
Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews](https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/against-capital-
punishment/)

Why he checked his phone while children were being gunned down, screaming, I
don’t know. But the _Punisher_ wallpaper ensured that this image would be
forever branded on my brain. For those who are unaware, _The Punisher_ is a TV
show about a vigilante:  
  
_“After exacting revenge on the people responsible for the deaths of his wife
and children, Frank Castle uncovers a conspiracy that runs deeper than New
York’s criminal underworld. Now known as the Punisher, he must dig deep into
the conspiracy to discover the truth about injustices that affect more than
just him and his family.”_

> “…honorable avengers demonstrate virtues like bravery, loyalty, and
> integrity. They take risks and accept responsibility for their actions. The
> three Israeli settlers showed none of these characteristics. They were
> cowards, looking for a physically slight victim to make the abduction easier
> and less risky. They had no personal ties to the Israeli victims … The
> killers did not accept responsibility; they tried to burn all evidence of
> their behavior. One of them pleaded insanity at the trial.” (p.146)

There’s a certain kind of death penalty apologist – not all, just some – who
remind me a lot of a police officer from Uvalde. In May 2022, a mass shooting
occurred at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas. 18-year-old Salvador
Ramos killed nineteen students and two teachers, and wounded seventeen others.
There have been several scandals involving the police department, and we won’t
get into them now, but it seems clear that the police were too afraid to do
much of anything as the children were being massacred. One image from a
security camera made quite an impression on me:

What if we reserved capital punishment for those whose guilt was certain? The
problem with this is that it ignores the _current_ standard, which is already
supposedly high enough to preclude any reasonable doubt. (What do those who
deploy this apologetic think the standard is now? 70% confidence?) Despite
this nominally high bar of “beyond a reasonable doubt,” many innocents have
been wrongfully convicted and put to death. In most (if not all) of those
cases, there _was_ room for reasonable doubt. But this high-minded standard
was imperfectly applied, which is exactly what would happen – has happened –
with any standard of certainty or near-certainty of guilt. Besides, any
specific example of a crime in which we’re certain of the perpetrator’s
culpability is going to be contentious. In the past, many judges, juries,
members of the press and public have felt that the evidence was only possible
to interpret in one way, only to discover that they had been mistaken.

We can make progress: we no longer kill 13-year-olds for stealing spoons. Yet,
I doubt anyone would defend the idea that we have a perfect justice system, or
that we’ll ever have a perfect justice system. Outside of thought experiment
land, it’ll always be imperfect, even if we stipulate to the people handing
out these irreversible punishments, “Oh, by the way, you have to be certain.”
Once again, how is this requirement of assurance any different from “Beyond a
reasonable doubt,” which is the standard now and was the standard at the time
of every death penalty horror story in recent memory? The evidential standard
for receiving the death penalty was never “Eh, flip a coin” or “Check your
crystal ball.” Every innocent who’s been convicted and put to death died at
the hands of people who thought they couldn’t be wrong.

Opponents of the death penalty disparagingly use the phrase “legalized
revenge,” a concept which does strike me as repellant, but not for the same
reason as most who use the term: For me, it’s the “legalized” part, not the
“revenge” part. Our legal system is intended to be impartial and impersonal.
When offenders commit crimes, the conflict is between the offender and the
state. But revenge is personal by nature. Make no mistake, the death penalty
_is_ about revenge – it’s certainly not about restorative justice or the
prevention of crime. And yet it’s carried out in a bloodless, processual,
legalized manner. Emotionless killing is unsettlingly creepy, and there’s
certainly nothing cathartic or satisfying – let alone virtuous – about this
kind of legalized “revenge” at the hands of a dispassionate third party. It no
longer resembles anything like honorable revenge. So what’s the point?

Some might worry this proves too much. If we’re so concerned with the
imperfect determination of guilt, and by extension, the administration of
punishment, then shouldn’t we abolish prisons? After all, some innocents are
imprisoned. Some laws are morally arbitrary, and even just laws are
arbitrarily enforced.

The application of capital punishment is often morally arbitrary. It’s not as
if the death penalty is exclusively reserved for the worst of the worst. Even
setting aside the innocents who have been on death row, those who are _guilty_
are often undeserving as well! In fact, advocates of capital punishment will
acknowledge that the death penalty system is often applied in a morally
arbitrary manner. Joshua Marquis, for instance, believes that _many_ of those
on death row do not deserve the death penalty. To be clear, he thinks that
these people are guilty – they just don’t deserve to die for what they did.
Even when guilt is determined correctly, that’s no guarantee that the death
penalty will be a proportionate punishment, since capital punishment, in
practice, is applied in a morally arbitrary manner.

Sommers believes that we are capable of “reorient[ing] our understanding of
justice to reflect what’s true and good about revenge without incurring its
unacceptable costs”, but that this would likely require a more fundamental
reevaluation of our Enlightenment values and our rejection of honor culture.
Honor can ward off cowardice, shamelessness, and selfishness. Properly
contained, it can engender courage, integrity, self-respect, loyalty,
solidarity, and potentially cure some measure of alienation and atomization.
If you’re at all interested in moral philosophy and moral psychology, I can’t
recommend the book enough (and if that doesn’t convince you, then buy it to
help assuage my guilt over including a gigantic blockquote).

Imagine someone you love on trial for something they did not do. They’re
wrongfully convicted in a slow, clinical legal process; and after a lengthy
time in prison, they’re killed by lethal injection. I can scarcely imagine the
horror of finding oneself in this position of knowing that someone you love
will be taken from you by a mob acting with the pretense of civility and
honor. It is something I wish on no one, and I hope that those responsible for
putting innocent people to death will someday come to their senses and stop
perpetuating this madness.

This particular section will not resonate with everybody. I’m going to assume
that revenge is not immoral across the board, and some on both sides will take
issue with that assumption. But for those who don’t think revenge is always
impermissible or ill-advised, you might be able to appreciate another reason
why the death penalty strikes some of us as so odious.

It’s not enough to defend the idea that we have free will, that we’re
responsible for our actions, that some have committed unspeakable acts of
evil, or even that the worst of the worst deserve to die. If you defend the
death penalty, you _must_ defend the death penalty _in practice_ , not just in
theory. People will be killed in practice, not in theory. To defend capital
punishment _is to defend_ the police, the courts, and the state generally in
its ability to determine guilt and carry out punishments. Abstract moral
arguments are insufficient: _You need to defend the state explicitly_ if you
want your case for capital punishment to withstand an iota of scrutiny. Even
if some people deserve to die, it wouldn’t mean a given organization should
have the legitimacy and power to carry out executions.

It’s plausible that human error is the ultimate source of moral arbitrariness
in the death penalty system. But human beings are involved at every single
stage of the process. So, it’s reasonable to conclude that we will never
eliminate moral arbitrariness from the death penalty system.

> “The brothers’ virtue lies not just in the act of revenge – which is
> gruesome and arguably disproportionate – but also in the anger that causes
> it. By adopting a prudent ‘what’s done is done, and let’s make the best of
> it’ approach, Jacob shows nothing but a concern for his safety and profit.
> The two brothers, by contrast, are too outraged over the treatment of their
> sister to engage in a cost-benefit analysis. Their anger leads to a
> decidedly imprudent act of revenge, and it’s the imprudence that
> demonstrates loyalty to their sister.” (pp.148-149)

> “The vast majority of law enforcement professionals surveyed agree that
> capital punishment does not deter violent crime; a survey of police chiefs
> nationwide found they rank the death penalty lowest among ways to reduce
> violent crime. They ranked increasing the number of police officers,
> reducing drug abuse, and creating a better economy with more jobs higher
> than the death penalty as the best ways to reduce violence. The FBI has
> found the states with the death penalty have the highest murder rates.”
>
> _The Case Against the Death Penalty, The American Civil Liberties Union_

> “…opposition to the death penalty wasn’t the real problem with Dukakis’s
> response. Rather, it was the clinical nature of his answer to such a
> personal question. Like Jacob, Dukakis showed no depth of feeling, no anger,
> no fierce loyalty to a close family member. Kitty has been raped and killed,
> and Dukakis is worried about whether the death penalty is a deterrent? This
> is no time for a cost-benefit analysis.” (pp.149-150)

Capital punishment is not reconcilable with the principle of remedy. When
mistakes are inevitably made, the punishment for the wrongly convicted cannot
be brought to an end and they cannot be given damages.

> “The standard argument for abolishing the death penalty holds that even when
> moral agents have culpably perpetrated heinous wrongs, executing them is an
> unacceptable attack on their dignity, something that even they do not
> deserve to suffer.”
>
> [_Jeffrey W. Howard, University College
> London_](https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/against-capital-punishment/)

> This response would have allowed Dukakis to retain his opposition to the
> death penalty and turn the tables on those who accused him of being ‘soft on
> crime’. Now it’s the proponents of capital punishment who are clinical,
> cowardly, and ‘by the book’. They’re the ones who want a torturous legal
> bureaucracy to do what a decent husband should want to do himself. By
> tapping into virtuous qualities of revenge, Dukakis could have had the best
> of both worlds.
>
> Critics of the death penalty often refer to it as ‘legalized revenge’, but
> the truth is closer to the opposite. Honor cultures, as we’ve seen, think
> it’s shameful when third parties punish people who have wronged them or
> their families. Revenge is personal. Most arguments against the death
> penalty involve deterrence and racial bias, and thus far arguments haven’t
> resonated with a majority of the US population. Is the death penalty a
> deterrent? Probably not, but proponents can reply that it’s not about
> deterrence; it’s about justice. Is there racial bias in how the death
> penalty is applied? Absolutely. But advocates can reply that we must work to
> eliminate the racial bias, not prohibit the practice. But what if, like my
> hypothetical Dukakis, opponents called the death penalty dishonorable—a sign
> of cowardice and weakness? This challenge might have greater resonance,
> especially for people in the so-called honor states where capital punishment
> is most popular.”
>
> _Why Honor Matters_ (pp.150-151)

Third, Nonemergence. Here I need to distinguish between “weak emergence” and
“strong emergence.” Weak emergence is the kind of emergence that’s ubiquitous
in the natural sciences. Atoms emerge from subatomic particles; molecules
emerge from atoms; organisms emerge from molecules; societies emerge from
organisms. At no point is there a _truly_ emergent phenomenon; there are no
new concreta that have been added to the ontological inventory of reality. The
weak sort of emergence is to be distinguished from strong emergence, which,
historically, has simply been called emergence. David Chalmers is a prominent
contemporary emergentist, whose naturalistic dualism makes use of strong
emergence. He thinks that if consciousness emerged, it must have been an
instance of strong emergence. To accept that experience emerged strongly is to
be a dualist in some sense. **Strongly emergent phenomena are not identical
to, reducible to, or deductible from other phenomena.** But on physicalism,
there are no giant leaps in nature that could be characterized as strong
emergence. One cannot simultaneously hold reductive physicalism _and_ the view
that the emergence of experience was a case of strong emergence, since to
claim that a phenomenon can be reduced (or to say that it’s identical to or
constituted by more fundamental parts) is to say that it emerged weakly.

If consciousness emerged, arranging subatomic particles into nerve cells
abruptly generates experience at an exact point. The lights are _completely_
_off_ when those same particles are arranged in a _slightly_ different way;
but arrange them as nerve cells, and it’ll feel like something for that matter
to be. So will one nerve cell do it? What about two nerve cells? If your
answer is 357,005 neurons, why wasn’t it 357,004? What’s so special about
nerve cells, anyway? They’re not made of unique material. They’re composed of
the same protons, neutrons, and electrons as anything else. So it must be the
_arrangement_ , right? Of course, I agree that altering the configuration of
matter will alter the contents of experience. But I can’t agree that altering
the configuration of matter will alchemize non-experiential stuff into
experiential stuff.

By physicalism, I mean reductive physicalism. The sort of physicalist or
materialist I’m concerned with affirms the existence of phenomenal
consciousness, which they believe has emerged from entirely non-experiential
concrete reality. There are more liberal versions of physicalism on offer,
like Strawson’s physicalism, but today, I’m only concerned with physicalism in
the ordinary sense — the kind that asserts that the intrinsic nature of matter
is non-experiential. Some might object to that characterization because they
don’t like the language of intrinsic natures. Maybe they think matter has no
intrinsic nature, that it’s all just structure and behavior. That’s fine, and
it happens to make the case against physicalism even easier. (As a brief
aside, it should be mentioned that a rejection of physicalism does not entail
that one rejects anything about physics or physical science. Many forms of
non-physicalism, certainly my form, are not _in any way_ in conflict with
naturalism, atheism, or physical science.)

The emergence of tables and chairs, or liquidity, or biology can be described
in purely structural, behavioral, third-personal terms. We go from one type of
objective description to another type of objective description. We never cross
the divide between objective and subjective, and there’s never a giant leap.

A phenomenon that is the product of strong emergence is not reducible to or
deducible from underlying phenomena. A phenomenon that is the product of weak
emergence _is_ reducible to or deducible from underlying phenomena. And if we
can show that weak emergence is always vague, and establish phenomenal realism
and precision, then that means the emergence of experience must have been a
case of strong emergence. If this is true, physicalism is false. Physicalists
must reject Realism, Precision, or the vagueness of weak emergence to escape.

So let us imagine the emergence of experience. There is only unfeeling, non-
experiential physical stuff on the most fundamental levels of our universe.
It’s not like anything for an electron, presumably. There’s no feeling or
sensation, no emotion, no qualitative experience at all, of any kind. Now
follow the plot of emergence that we’ve pieced together from the most
fundamental levels of the universe to the most highly emergent levels. If
we’re starting with, say, subatomic particles, they combine to make atoms,
which combine to make molecules, which combine to make cells and organisms and
so on up the scale. From physics to chemistry, up to microbiology, all the way
to brains, sociology and macro-scale reality. Nothing new is being added at
any point in this upward journey; every level is reducible to the level
beneath it. Chemistry is just another way of talking about physics when you
zoom out a bit. We have a smooth gradient of gradual change all the way up to
brains. But at some point, it becomes like something for this matter from
inside. We go from the fundamental levels, which are made up of non-conscious,
physical material that has no subjective experience; and at some point, we get
conscious physical material that has a subjective point of view, which I’ll
say again, is really, really real. When we go from subatomic particles to
atoms, we’re using a new way of talking about _the same stuff that’s always
been there._ But if we take experience to be real, we cannot say the same of
its emergence. It’s not the same stuff that’s always been there; there’s been
a non-redundant addition to the inventory of reality.

There are a few ideas that, taken together, have led me away from physicalism.
These points could factor into an argument against physicalism; namely, that
ordinary physicalism doesn’t provide us with tools adequate to explain what we
know about our world. The first and most important of these ideas that have
led me away (or astray) is an unshakable realism about phenomenal
consciousness. By phenomenal consciousness, I mean experience: _being_ such
that there’s something that it is like to be. If it’s like something to be,
phenomenal consciousness is present. Realism about experience is, as Galen
Strawson puts it, “the obligatory starting point for any remotely realistic
(indeed any non-self-defeating) theory of what there is.”

Phenomenal precision is one reason experience is different from tables and
chairs, biology and beards, piles of sand and when the day becomes the night.
It’s vague when sand becomes a pile of sand. There is no precise moment the
day becomes the night. There is no single hair that turns stubble into
beardness. There is no particulate change in the construction of a chair when
we cross the chair/not-a-chair dividing line. There are borderline cases: I
could continually deform a chair, and when it ceases to be a chair is vague.
Any point you choose will be arbitrary. But as we’ve seen, it is either like
something to be or it is not. There is no smooth gradient of gradual change
that ordinarily marks weak emergence at this level. I couldn’t start with
consciousness and continually deform it until it wasn’t really clear whether
it was conscious or not. (This is one reason functionalism is probably not
true, since functions are essentially vague.)

> “Any living organism, including a human being, is a complex material system.
> It consists of a huge number of particles combined in a special way. Each of
> us is composed of matter that had a largely inanimate history before finding
> its way onto our plates or those of our parents. It was once probably part
> of the sun, but matter from another galaxy would do as well. If it were
> brought to earth, and grass were grown in it, and milk from a cow that ate
> the grass were drunk by a pregnant woman, then her child’s brain would be
> partly composed of that matter. Anything whatever, if broken down far enough
> and rearranged, could be incorporated into a living system. No constituents
> besides matter are needed.”

my problem with emergence is it makes mental causation impossible. In assuming
that mind derives from matter, the subjective becomes a second class citizen
totally derivative of the more real particles. Since other minds are invisible
entities if they have no efficacy there is no theory of the mind that can ever
make sense since another private conscious being like me can only be theorized
based on its effects. see <https://philpapers.org/rec/SLEPAR> and  
<https://philpapers.org/rec/SLESA>

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F02%2F15%2Fcan-physicalism-explain-phenomenal-consciousness%2F&signup_flow=account)

Let’s return for a moment to Realism. I take experience to be the most
certainly known real, natural, physical, concrete phenomenon. “Natural” and
“physical” deserve their own discussion, but for now, I want to focus on
concrete. “Concrete” here means “not abstract.” By “abstract,” I’m not
diverging from the usual philosophical sense of abstract, wherein some
philosophers hold that abstract objects — e.g. numbers or concepts — exist and
can safely be considered real. I think experiential goings-on are plainly
concrete and not abstract. It seems absurd to take my direct experience and
claim that it’s merely an abstract concept, but it’s worth taking a moment to
address this increasingly well-worn physicalist escape route.

> “The demand for continuity has, over large tracts of science, proved itself
> to possess true prophetic power. We ought therefore ourselves sincerely to
> try every possible mode of conceiving the dawn of consciousness so that it
> may not appear equivalent to the irruption into the universe of a new
> nature, non-existent until then. Merely to call the consciousness ‘nascent’
> will not serve our turn. It is true that the word signifies not yet quite
> born, and so seems to form a sort of bridge between existence and nonentity.
> But that is a verbal quibble. The fact is that discontinuity comes in if a
> new nature comes in at all. The quantity of the latter is quite immaterial.
> The girl in ‘Midshipman Easy’ could not excuse the illegitimacy of her child
> by saying, ‘it was a very small one.’ And Consciousness, however small, is
> an illegitimate birth in any philosophy that starts without it, and yet
> professes to explain all facts by continuous evolution. If evolution is to
> work smoothly, consciousness in some shape must have been present at the
> very origin of things. Accordingly we find that the more clear-sighted
> evolutionary philosophers are beginning to posit it there.”
>
> _William James, The Principles of Psychology_

Physicalism, which posits the weak emergence of experience, is in conflict
with Realism. I think in order to accept weak emergence with regards to
experience, you might have to deny Phenomenal precision. Up here in the
biological macro-world, emergence is vague. That the emergence of experience
is precise is a signal that this is not business as usual. This is not how
weak emergence is supposed to work. The physicalist also runs into the problem
that a new, concrete natural phenomenon has appeared, which is entirely
disanalogous from every other case of weak emergence. It’s also entirely
disanalogous because we’ve crossed the objective/subjective divide, and
because we have no intelligible account of how to get from one to the other.
If one wants to remain committed to the idea that consciousness emerged, one
must commit to strong emergence. And to accept strong emergence is to reject
physicalism.

I honestly don’t understand how any rational person could think these are just
nothing arguments–unless they’re just being dogmatic about their preferred
metaphysical worldview…or they don’t want to admit that they’ve been wrong for
much of their lives.

This is one of the most persuasive and clearly-written articles I’ve read on
the problems involved with trying to fit phenomenal consciousness into a
standard physicalist worldview!

The only way to wriggle out of this and continue to affirm the weak emergence
of experience is to alter our concept of experience, effectively redefining
experience to mean something other than experience. It must be a mere concept,
an illusion, a convenient way of talking about the same stuff that’s always
been there. To affirm any of these is to abandon Realism about experience.
These are all forms of eliminativism; some of them explicit, some of them
semantically obscure.

Phenomenal consciousness possesses more ontological weight than chairs or
biology or liquidity. Those are just different vocabularies. Experience, on
the other hand, is not a different way of talking about the same stuff that’s
always been there. If it emerged, it’s something new — something new that’s
concretely real. We’ve added to the ontological inventory of reality in way
disanalogous to biochemistry. Furthermore, this new concrete reality of
experience must have emerged at a _precise_ _moment_ , since it’s not vague
whether or not experience is present. This is not weak emergence. Weak
emergence is not characterized by a sudden leap.

Nagel’s Material Composition premise could work just as well as Monism for our
purposes here. (Strawson, along with other Russellians, has gone to great
lengths explaining how “material composition” is compatible with panpsychism;
indeed, how physicalism, properly understood, is compatible with panpsychism.)

To say that something emerged weakly is to say that it’s reducible. Weak
emergence is in the business of giving reductive explanation. If a phenomenon
is strongly emergent, that means it’s irreducible. Phenomenal precision, I
think, gives us a hint that experience would have to be strongly emergent. If
we accept that weak emergence is always vague, then it follows that
physicalism doesn’t work.

> “Human physiologists may take a special interest in [physical brain events];
> but they can, in principle, be understood just as well, or even better, by
> creatures totally unlike us in physical and mental structure. To understand
> them such creatures need not take up our point of view. Physical brain
> processes can be understood objectively, from the outside, because they are
> not subjective phenomena. And no description or analysis of the objective
> nervous system, however complete, will ever by itself imply anything which
> is not objective.”
>
> Thomas Nagel

Allow me to concede that phenomenal consciousness _is_ a concept. Many
physicalists go to great lengths to establish this. I’m happy to grant their
point. What I’m unwilling to grant is that experience is _just_ a concept. It
clearly enjoys concrete existence. Our concept refers to something that is
directly, immediately known by every conscious creature. The reason for
holding, tiresomely, that one’s direct experience is merely an abstraction,
rather than a concrete natural phenomenon, is that it allows physicalists to
pretend to be Realists by way of diminishing the ontological weight of
experience. If one doesn’t want to bite the absurd antirealist bullet, they
may hold that one’s immediate experience is merely a concept. So one can claim
to be a realist about phenomenal consciousness while surreptitiously denying
Realism. I’m not a fake realist about experience. I’m a real realist, which
means I accept experience as the most certainly known, concretely existing
natural phenomenon. To insist otherwise would mean that phenomenal
consciousness is “real” in only a very limited sense. The bottom line: the
experience you’re having right now is not just a convenient way of talking
about the world. It’s really, really real — real in a deeper sense than most
things we’re realists about.

I think Realism entails Precision/Sharpness. Phenomenal precision is the
notion that experience is not vague; it is completely and utterly precise
whether experience is present. For this reason, phenomenal consciousness is
sharp: it doesn’t admit of borderline cases. Put simply, it is either like
something to be or it is not. To see the truth of “it is either like something
to be or it is not,” we need only consider the alternative and try to imagine
a borderline case of experience. Can it “kind of” be like something? No, for
then it is like something. Can it merely “seem” to be like something? No, for
the same reason. Can it “just barely” be like something? It is either like
something to be or it’s not — there’s actually no middle ground to be had
between these two states. Experience is not vague in this sense.

This strange fact about experience (that it is not vague) leads us to a
sorites-style argument against the emergence of consciousness.

Physicalists think experience emerged somewhere in the realm of complex
organisms. The precision of the emergence of experience, at this organismal
level, is highly anomalous. We’re not talking about an ordinary case of
emergence here. I don’t think phenomenal precision demonstrates that
experience is definitely irreducible, but I think it’s a hint that it is. If
experience is irreducible, then its emergence (if it emerged) would have the
precise character I’ve been describing. So for physicalists, phenomenal
precision is an anomaly. The transition from objective to subjective is
another anomaly. The lack of an intelligible story is an anomaly.

Physicalism seems to be unable to explain phenomenal consciousness, since it
would require us to redefine consciousness in a way tantamount to its denial.
(Nonreductive physicalists are a little better off, since they don’t deny the
most certainly known natural phenomenon, but their nonreductive position
amounts to dualism of one kind or another.)

For all the other examples of weak emergence, we have the same category of
concepts on either side of the emergent divide: we go from objective
description to objective description. But with consciousness, we go from
objective description to subjective description. How many objective
descriptions does it take to add up to a subjective description? How can we
describe _behavior_ in such a way that leads to _experience_ , i.e., how do we
go from third-personal description to first-personal description? At the very
least, there’s an epistemic problem here. But why should we think this
objective/subjective gap is also an ontic gap? Well, it seems impossible in
principle to give an intelligible account of how we go from one to the other.
If subjective reality emerged from non-subjectivity, we should be able to give
an intelligible account of how that happened. We can give a perfectly
intelligible account of how we get from chemistry to biology, from non-tables
to tables, from non-liquid molecules to liquidity. But how do we bridge the
objective and subjective? How can we start with third-person, objective
description and end up at first-person, subjective description? Physicalists
need to do more than simply appeal to unrelated examples of successful
reduction and cases of weak emergence without explaining why we should think
the emergence of experience was also a case of weak emergence. Look, I don’t
need all the details. Just the broad strokes will do! To quote David Chalmers,
“[Reductive physicalists] will have to give us some idea of how the existence
of consciousness might be entailed by physical facts. While it is not fair to
expect all the details, one at least needs an account of how such an
entailment might _possibly_ go.” All I want is an intelligible explanation of
how we get from non-experiential reality to experiential reality, just like we
have an intelligible explanation of the examples commonly mentioned. In those
cases, we have a smooth gradient of gradual change. How could this be true of
the emergence of experience, given phenomenal precision?

The arbitrariness objection is certainly an interesting one that I’d like to
see physicalists contend with. However, I think the more serious consequence
of phenomenal precision is the charge of strong emergence. This is for two
reasons. First, I find strong emergence to be deeply implausible.

> “I don’t think that you could arrange mere non-conscious physical stuff in
> such a way that [experience] would spring into existence. That would be what
> we call ‘radical emergence’—it would be like getting concrete things out of
> abstract things.”
>
> _Galen Strawson_

Here’s the problem for physicalism: once we grant that experience is real and
irreducible, we can know that physicalism is false. And once we accept we need
strong emergence to get experience, we’ve admitted that experience _is_
irreducible. Saying that a phenomenon emerged weakly is another way of saying
it’s reducible. Weak emergence is in the business of offering reductive
explanation. If we think strong emergence is required, the phenomenon in
question is irreducible. And once we’ve accepted that experience is real and
irreducible, it’s over for physicalism.

Second, one who endorses emergence of this sort is no longer a physicalist,
but a dualist. If experience could not have emerged weakly due to phenomenal
precision (i.e. because no smooth gradient of gradual change is possible), and
because our experiences are not merely concepts but concretely real, we have
strong emergence. If we have strong emergence, we no longer have physicalism.

If I had to offer a one-sentence response to the question, “Why aren’t you a
physicalist?” I would borrow Scott Clifton’s (also known as Theoretical
Bullshit) succinct answer when the question was put to him: “Because
consciousness is a thing.”

If you’re a reductionist, you’re committed to the idea that emergence is
really a story of _the same stuff that’s always been there_ evolving into
different processes. But if there was this transition from it not being like
anything to it being like something, that would mean you’re wrong… _unless_
it’s not _really_ like something. It’s not like anything at the fundamental
levels; it’s not really like anything up here. You could say it’s just a
concept, or just a way of talking about different collections of matter.
Speaking in the language of molecules, for example, is just a way of talking
about collections of physical matter arranged molecule-wise. The atom isn’t
some kind of ontologically separate thing from the protons and neutrons and
electrons that constitute it. Atoms are entirely reducible to their component
parts. And crucially, we have an intelligible story of how we get from one to
the other where we can clearly see that it’s the same stuff that’s always been
there. Consciousness, however, is not just another “way of talking about.” It
really looks as though something novel has emerged. If experience emerged, we
have an appearance of an entirely new, concretely real, natural phenomenon.

[ARTWORK: Greg Dunn](Greg Dunn). _The laminar structure of the cerebellum, a
region involved in movement and proprioception (calculating where your body is
in space)_.

Another distinguishing factor in the case of experience, in addition to the
unique objective/subjective divide, is the ontological status of experience
versus that of a chair or a whirlpool. “Whirlpool” is a useful way of talking
about some concrete reality X. Similarly, “chair” is a convenient concept;
it’s a helpful way of talking about some concrete reality Y. But there’s more
ontological weight to experience than there is to a chair. A chair is a
concept that refers to some concrete reality. Experience, on the other hand,
_is_ the concrete reality — it’s not just a convenient way of talking about
some unknown thing-in-itself to which we have no direct access.

So the argument against physicalism only needs a Realism premise and a
Nonreductionism premise. Some physicalists accept Nonreductionism but reject
Realism; others accept Realism but reject Nonreductionism (the more common
route). I think once you flesh out a reducible form of experience, your
position amounts to a rejection of Realism. I personally think physicalism
leads naturally to illusionism about consciousness, and many physicalists
agree. That’s why I’m not a physicalist. The argument for panpsychism needs
Realism and Nonreductionism as premises, but it also needs Nonemergence and
Monism to block the way to dualism. Again, once we accept Realism and
Nonreductionism, it’s over for physicalism. But if we want to get to
panpsychism, we have to add the Nonemergence and Monism premises.

> “Very roughly if consciousness does not admit of borderline cases, then we
> will have to suppose that some utterly precise micro-level change—down to an
> exact arrangement of particles—marked the first appearance of consciousness
> (or the change from non-conscious to conscious embryo/foetus), and it is
> going to seem arbitrary that it was that utterly precise change that was
> responsible for this significant change in nature.”
>
> _Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy_

Finally, we have Monism, which shouldn’t be too controversial with
materialists. To deny Monism, obviously, would be to reject materialism.
However, monism comes in many varieties, not just the materialist variety.
Neutral monists, idealists, and panpsychists endorse Monism. Panpsychists can
even endorse a more specific version of Monism, as Thomas Nagel explains in
his essay Panpsychism (1979). Rather than taking “Monism” as a premise in his
argument, he takes “Material Composition” as a premise.

Each one of these ideas we’ve discussed is more plausible than its denial.
Realism, Phenomenal precision, Nonemergence, Monism, the seeming impossibility
of bridging the objective and subjective, the fact that we don’t have an
intelligible story of emergence (and should have one). And these ideas, taken
together, arguably lead to panpsychism.

So we’ve been touching on this throughout, but I want to make my reasoning
more explicit. The key premise here is “Weak emergence is essentially vague.”
If that can be demonstrated, physicalism can be demonstrated to be false. I
can easily defend the premise “Weak emergence is _usually_ vague,” and that
“Weak emergence is vague in the microbiological world in which we live.” But
once we accept that premise, that weak emergence is essentially vague, we only
need accept Realism and Precision to reject physicalism.

Nothing is non-controversial in philosophy, but I think Realism is a safe
premise. I think Precision is a safe premise. It’s showing that weak emergence
is vague — vague in every case — that is harder to show. It’s easy to show
that weak emergence is usually vague. Especially in the realm where we live,
where consciousness is supposed by physicalists to have emerged (that is, in
the realm of biology, tables and chairs, liquidity, niftiness, and so on). So
those are my three premises: Realism, Phenomenal precision, and the vagueness
of weak emergence.

Experience is unobservable objectively. If it wasn’t for the fact that we
ourselves are conscious, there would be no evidence that consciousness exists.
No objective description, on its own, will ever imply the existence of
anything that is not objective. We can describe everything about the human
brain and its emergence objectively, but that third-person description will
exclude the first-person point of view, without which it wouldn’t be a
conscious experience at all. How could we bridge this divide without strong
emergence?

‪(Of course I mean emergent in the weak sense, e.g. in the way that
biochemistry, tables, and whirlpools are emergent. Consciousness could still
be strongly emergent as naturalistic dualists take it to be.‬)

Physicalists think experience emerges weakly, in the same sense that biology
and tables and whirlpools emerge. Biology emerges out of chemistry. Liquidity
emerges from molecules which are not liquid. Tables emerge from matter which
is not tables. So we have no trouble getting A from ~A in all sorts of cases.
So why should experience be any different?

Up until this point, I’ve only obliquely referenced the irreducibility of
consciousness. I didn’t explicitly add a Nonreductionism premise because I was
trying to get you to feel the intuition without simply saying that experience
cannot be reduced to parts that are not themselves experiential. That’s what
we’re trying to find out, isn’t it? So I talked about phenomenal precision,
the subjective/objective divide, and the anomalous lack of an intelligible
story of emergence.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F09%2F21%2Fethical-intuitionism-w-michael-huemer%2F&signup_flow=account)

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [debate](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debate/),
[error theory](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/error-theory/),
[ethical intuitionism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ethical-
intuitionism/),
[explained](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/explained/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/),
[interview](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/interview/),
[metaethics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/metaethics/), [michael
huemer](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/michael-huemer/), [moral
antirealism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-antirealism/),
[moral naturalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-
naturalism/), [moral non-
naturalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-non-
naturalism-2/), [moral
realism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-realism/),
[podcast](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/podcast/), [walden
pod](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/walden-pod/)

**Moral Non-Naturalism/Intuitionism:** There are objective moral properties,
and they are irreducible. Evaluative truths are not reducible to descriptive
truths. Additionally, at least some moral truths are known intuitively.

**Moral Naturalism:** There are objective moral properties, but they are
reducible. Evaluative truths are reducible to descriptive truths.
Additionally, moral statements can be justified empirically.

**Subjectivism:** Some moral statements are true, but not objectively. For a
thing to be good is for some individual or group to (be disposed to) take some
attitude towards it.

Why are these the only five broad options? Take a moral statement, like
“Torturing an infant for fun is wrong.” This is either (1) neither true nor
false, (2) false, or (3) true. If it’s true, the next question is whether you
think it’s true in the sense that realists intend — objectively true. If
something is _objectively_ the case, then it doesn’t matter how anyone feels
about it, reacts to it, or whether they even know about it. Its truth is
independent of observers. While a statement like “Vanilla ice cream is better
than chocolate” could be true, its truth would constitutively depend on
reactions, attitudes, feelings, etc. It could be _true_ , but not objectively;
it could be true for me but not for you. Likewise, one could think that the
truth of a moral statement depends on observers. This would make you a
subjectivist.

**Error theory/nihilism:** Moral statements (that imply that something has an
evaluative property) are all false.

In his book, [Ethical Intuitionism](https://www.amazon.com/Ethical-
Intuitionism-M-
Huemer/dp/0230573746/ref=sr_1_1?crid=8CEYB73OM4PJ&keywords=ethical+intuitionism+huemer&qid=1663122578&s=books&sprefix=ethical+intuitionism+huemer%2Cstripbooks%2C75&sr=1-1),
Huemer argues that there are exactly five metaethical positions:

On the other hand, if you think “Torturing an infant for fun is wrong” is an
objectively true statement, you’re a moral realist. So, if you think it’s
neither true nor false, you’re an antirealist. If you think it’s false, you’re
an antirealist. If you think it’s true, but only in the sense that some people
prefer the “torturing infants for fun” ice cream while others prefer the “not
torturing babies for fun” ice cream, then you’re an antirealist. Finally, if
you take the spooky, unscientific, illogical, rationally indefensible view
that some things are actually right and other things are wrong, you’re a moral
realist. Whether you think evaluative truths are reducible to descriptive
truths or whether you think they’re irreducible divides the realists into the
fourth and fifth camps — naturalists and non-naturalists/intuitionists.

**Noncognitivism/expressivism:** Moral statements are neither true nor false.
Evaluative predicates do not even purportedly refer to any sort of property,
nor do evaluative statements assert propositions.

Michael Huemer recently joined me to talk about metaethics, moral realism vs.
antirealism, and his own preferred theory of ethical intuitionism. We also
touched on evolutionary debunking arguments, companions in guilt, ‘moral
platonism’, widespread moral disagreement, moral fictionalism, mistakes
skeptics often make, and much else in moral philosophy.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F08%2F21%2Fnew-stuff-hot-off-the-press%2F&signup_flow=account)

[“Religion is at the intersection of everything I care about” Interview w/
Sentientism ](https://youtu.be/e9iuwVIXDZc)This was a very wide-ranging
conversation I had with the host of the Sentientism podcast on my personal
background, young earth creationism, naturalism and how it’s defined, moral
realism, ethical intuitionism, divine command theory as a form of moral
subjectivism, animal ethics, the moral implications of panpsychism, and lots
of other stuff about what’s real and what matters.

I’ve been very active in the last month or so, despite the relative quiet on
this blog. Here’s what I’ve been up to:

followed by Dustin Crummett’s response video, [What can we do about wild
animal suffering? ](https://youtu.be/gbCAW_fKNQE)

[How did religion evolve? – w/ Naturalism Next](https://youtu.be/ARPxNYNgiSc).
We discuss “the cognitive science argument against theism” and the
evolutionary origins of religious belief and practice.

Another way you can be an agnostic is by withholding judgement. Here, one
simply refrains from assigning a credence or likelihood to the proposition.
Someone might favor this option for different reasons. Maybe they’re an “in-
principle agnostic,” and think it’s impossible to assign a credence to the
proposition in principle. Alternatively, maybe they don’t feel comfortable in
making a judgement, for whatever reason, so they don’t assign a credence. We
could split those into two different types of agnostic (a suspension agnostic
and an in-principle agnostic), but what they have in common is that they both
withhold judgement and don’t assign a likelihood to the proposition in
question.

If your belief is justified but not true, it seems wrong to say you have
knowledge. You might have really good reasons supporting your belief that no
one can refute. But if it’s not true, it’s not knowledge. So having a
_justified belief_ is not enough.

I’m not an agnostic. I’m not an “agnostic atheist.” I’m an atheist because I
believe the proposition “God does not exist,” is more likely true than not.

We need a _justified true belief_ in order to say we have knowledge (on this
view). There’s something called the Gettier problem that seems to undermine
this, but the JTB conception of knowledge is still a good jumping-off point. A
lot of the controversies surrounding JTB have to do with adding another
condition to the three already mentioned, asking what counts as justification,
or otherwise adding to or modifying JTB. So, like I said, it’s a good place to
start if you want to think more about this issue. Like everything else in
philosophy, figuring out what constitutes knowledge is more complicated
business than you might think. (I’d recommend Michael Huemer’s book,
_Knowledge, Reality, and Value: A Mostly Common Sense Guide to Philosophy_ if
you’re looking for a pain-free discussion of this and many other complicated
issues in philosophy.)

One thing that’s clear is that on this conception of knowledge, and many
others, you can have knowledge without having absolute certainty in your
belief, which is why this is relevant to the graph. Regardless of your
analysis of knowledge, it’s widely agreed that certainty is not a necessary
condition for knowledge. In order to say we know a proposition to be true or
false, we don’t need 100% certainty in our belief. Certainty is not a
necessary condition for knowledge.

Can you be an “agnostic atheist,” or are those terms mutually exclusive? I try
to explain how the famous four quadrant graph misunderstands the nature of
belief, knowledge, and agnosticism.

I think a desire for intellectual humility is what drives a lot of atheists to
call themselves “agnostic atheists.” That’s a good thing. But you don’t need
to claim to be 100% certain that God does not exist in order to be an atheist.
Nor do theists need absolute certainty to believe in God. You can be an
atheist who just says “God probably does not exist.” In fact, that’s the
normal way of being an atheist. That’s how most atheists, academic and non-
academic, use the term.

Whether you say you _know_ God exists or doesn’t exist depends entirely on
your conception of knowledge. But if you believe God exists, to any degree,
you’re a theist. If you’re pretty sure God doesn’t exist, you’re an atheist.
If you’re absolutely certain God doesn’t exist, you need to rethink that, but
you’re an atheist. If you think God doesn’t exist, but you can’t prove it with
certainty, you’re an atheist. The bottom line is that _if you think the
proposition “God doesn’t exist” is more likely true than not, you’re an
atheist._

Here’s the proposition in question: God exists. Which best characterizes your
view? Strongly agree, agree, not sure, disagree, strongly disagree. I land
somewhere between disagree and strongly disagree, hence “God probably does not
exist.”

A related concept in a discussion like this is _knowledge_. There’s a much-
discussed conception of knowledge, that of “justified true belief.” On this
view, you have knowledge if and only if you have a justified true belief.

Calling yourself an “agnostic atheist” is nonsensical. If you’re an atheist,
you think the proposition “God does not exist” is more likely true than not.
It’s that simple. If you’re a theist, it’s because you judge the proposition
“God exists” to be more likely than not. If you’re an agnostic, it’s either
because you’re withholding judgement and not assigning a credence to the
proposition for whatever reason, _or_ because you judge the evidence to be
roughly counterbalanced (i.e., your credence is roughly .5). Being an atheist
or a theist doesn’t require one to make totally irrational claims to absolute
certainty! Certainty is not the bar for knowledge (or for making a claim). It
never has been.

As an aside, I’ve also seen some funny ideas about the notion of “making a
claim.” Like, “I’m an atheist, but I don’t claim God doesn’t exist.” That is
an incoherent sentence. _Claim_ is a bit like _belief_ : it’s not as big of a
deal as you might think. Making a claim doesn’t require one to have certainty.
My claim is that it’s more probable than not that God does not exist. If
you’re an atheist, you’re implicitly making a claim about God’s existence.

One way to be an agnostic is to judge the scales to be balanced somewhat
equally. You take the probability of a proposition to be roughly 50%, or .5.
In other words, you think the evidence is roughly counterbalanced. (Maybe
somewhere between .4 and .6 confidence in a given proposition.)

A lot of these discussions fail to get off the ground because of confusion
around the notion of _belief_. Belief, in these contexts, is not quite as
significant as many people take it to be. Belief is just a matter of accepting
a proposition. That’s how epistemologists and philosophers use the term. It
doesn’t mean you have _faith_ in the proposition, it doesn’t mean you have no
evidence for the proposition; it just means you accept or affirm the
proposition.

So first, agnosticism. There are two main ways one can be an agnostic. [(This
classification is based on Joe Schmid’s
classification.)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YTsSW7UeZpY&t=212s)

I wont be able to rephrase it any differently so if you dont catch my drift I
doubt you will

So what about the supposed dichotomy between belief and knowledge? Well, it
can make sense to say “I have a belief, but not knowledge.” You _can_ have a
belief without having knowledge, since your belief might not meet the
conditions for knowledge (e.g. being a justified true belief). However, it
makes no sense at all to say “I have knowledge, but not a belief.” Again, if
you have a belief, that does _not_ mean you have no evidence, or you take it
on faith, or anything like that. It just means you affirm a proposition.

  2. Pingback: [CA82 What the ‘agnostic atheist’ graph gets wrong | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2021/04/25/ca82-what-the-agnostic-atheist-graph-gets-wrong/)

“It just means I don’t think you have sufficient reason to make a claim.” —>
“Another way you can be an agnostic is by withholding judgement. Here, one
simply refrains from assigning a credence or likelihood to the proposition.”

Take _“My car is parked outside.”_ I accept that proposition, so I _believe_
my car is parked outside.

We haven’t said anything about _certainty_. Certainty would be having a
credence of 1, or 100%. No one in epistemology thinks that you’re an agnostic
if you have less than absolute certainty in a proposition. That’s just not
what the word means. If you assign a credence of .99 to the proposition “God
does not exist,” you’re not an agnostic. You’re an atheist.

Richard Dawkins actually provided a much more useful way of approaching the
issue than the four quadrant graph: the Dawkins Scale.

1 is absolute certainty that God exists. 7 is absolute certainty that God does
not exist. A person around 4 is an agnostic. And there are gradations between
those points. This is actually much closer to the way philosophers of religion
approach the issue than the four quadrant graph, which really should just be
discarded. Dawkins’ labels and descriptions for these different points muddy
things up a bit, but the general approach here of assigning a _credence_ to a
proposition, talking in terms of _likelihood_ or _probability_ is a much
better way of approaching these issues. Dawkins’ point when he came up with
this scale was that being at a 7 or a 1 was silly. You can be at a 6-point-
something, but it’s irrational to go to a 7.

I know my car is parked outside, but I can’t be absolutely certain. Think
about how screwed up our language would be if we could only use the word
“knowledge” in cases where we had absolute certainty. We would never use the
word “knowledge,” except in a handful of cases, like knowledge about my own
mental states or basic logical truths. Again, certainty is not a necessary
condition for knowledge. An agnostic is not defined as someone who claims to
have anything less than absolute certainty in a proposition.

Some people go so far as to claim that they don’t have beliefs, or that having
beliefs is somehow irrational. But again, “belief” just means you accept a
proposition, like “There is a rather large cat on my couch.” You have beliefs!
You believe the earth goes around the sun, because you accept the proposition
“The earth goes around the sun.” You don’t _just_ lack a belief in
geocentrism; you think it’s false. (In fact, I would say you _know_ it’s
false, even though you can’t have absolute certainty that it’s false.)

Intellectual humility is important, and I think that’s the real motivation
behind the chart. Thoughtful non-believers don’t want to make any irrational
claims to certainty, or signal that they’re closed off to the possibility that
they’re wrong. That’s a good thing, but that’s not really the issue at hand.
Very few atheists would assign a credence of 100% to the proposition “Goes
does not exist.” The word for a person who claims absolute certainty here
should be “moron,” not “gnostic atheist.” Unfortunately, I know a lot of
theists who say they’re absolutely certain that their preferred form of theism
is true. But certainty is not on the table for anyone.

Based on the definitions on this article, I think you’re an agnostic calling
yourself an atheist.

So one way you could be an agnostic is to withhold assigning a credence at
all; another way would be taking the evidence to be roughly counterbalanced.
_An agnostic is not one who claims to have anything less than absolute
certainty._ An agnostic is someone who thinks the evidence is roughly
counterbalanced or doesn’t even assign a credence to the proposition.

No, though. Me saying I disagree with your statement about God existing
doesn’t mean I think he doesn’t or is likely not to exist. It just means I
don’t think you have sufficient reason to make a claim. I aknowledge that I
also don’t have significant reason to make a claim such as ‘God does not
exist’

You can’t be an agnostic _and_ an atheist. The proposition in question is “God
does not exist.” If you think “God does not exist,” is more likely true than
not, you’re an atheist. If you think the evidence is roughly counterbalanced,
you’re an agnostic. If you don’t assign a likelihood at all to the
proposition, you’re an agnostic of a different sort. But you can’t
simultaneously think “God does not exist” is more probable than not _and_
think it’s 50/50. These are mutually exclusive positions. And, of course, if
you think “God does not exist” is probably false, you’re a theist.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F04%2F22%2Fwhat-the-agnostic-atheist-graph-gets-wrong%2F&signup_flow=account)

That’s exactly what I’m inveighing against here. Atheism is not just a lack of
belief, at least according to virtually all academic philosophical sources on
the subject.

If your belief is true but not justified, it also seems wrong to say you have
knowledge. If you correctly believe that the earth orbits the sun and not the
other way around, but you only believe so because it’s raining outside, you
might have a true belief, but you have no good justification for your belief.
You just got lucky. So having a _true belief_ is not enough.

Beliefs can be held with different kinds of conviction: some atheists are
certain that god doesn’t exist, some atheists are very strongly persuaded that
god doesn’t exist, some atheists are fairly sure that god doesn’t exist, some
atheists are only slightly swayed in favor of there being no gods. What they
have in common is that they all believe, with some degree of confidence, the
proposition “God does not exist.”

To be clear, the chart is somewhat ambiguous. I’m mostly working off of the
claims of those who use the chart. Often, when they say, “But do you _know_
God doesn’t exist?” what they mean is “Are you _certain_ God doesn’t exist?”
They also tend to have some mistaken ideas about the notion of “belief” and
“claim,” as well as agnosticism.

The problem with this four-quadrant graph is that it’s working with a
completely misleading idea of what “agnostic” means and what “knowledge”
means. It seems to conflate knowledge with certainty, and it implies that
agnosticism is when one has less than 100% certainty about a proposition.
Those are not small mistakes. And they render the whole chart useless,
unfortunately.

This is a great piece, I loved reading it, but I have an issue with your
repeated definition of atheism as ‘someone who thinks its more likely a god
doesnt exist than does’ … thats not true, not to my understanding.. correct me
if im wrong, please! But as I understand it atheism is simply the lack of a
belief in a god. It doesnt tell you anything about the likelyhood the
individual thinks of there being no God. Only that they dont believe that
there is one. Its not quite the same thing. I am an atheist, i.e who doesn’t
think that I have any reason to believe in a God, therefore from where does
this claim of probability come from? I simply do not hold the belief that a
God exists until such a moment comes where someone provides me evidence either
that there is or isnt. That is hardly a position of stating that God is not
likely to exist. I do believe that, too, but my point is my atheism alone
doesnt tell you anything about that.

Absolute certainty is not an option available to mature believers or non-
believers. All we can do is to disagree about which way the balance of
considerations tilts. I think the task at hand is to construct competing
models that explain the world we see, then compare our competing models and
ask which does a better job explaining the data, all things considered.

Great analysis. Layman atheists fail to grasp some simple concepts and make
fatal mistakes like defining atheism as a lack of belief and mixing
agnosticism with atheism.

My instincts are that human intervention in nature is guilty until proven
innocent. A very high burden must be met, and this can probably only be
achieved in cases of relatively minor alleviations of wild animal suffering.
I’m not against the idea in principle. Many of the arguments against
intervention in wild animal suffering are no good. (I haven’t discussed the
most common ones here because they’re so terrible.) I agree with Peter Singer,
who argued that “if it is in our power to prevent something bad from
happening, without thereby sacrificing anything of comparable moral
importance, we ought, morally, to do it.” I just don’t think it is within our
power to do it. [Neither does
Singer:](https://www.nybooks.com/articles/1973/06/14/food-for-thought/)

On the topic of ending suffering, are you familiar with the Qualia Research
Institute, and if so, do you think their ideas and goals are at all feasible?

> TL;DR
>
> [Wild animal suffering](https://audioboom.com/posts/8127169-56-we-probably-
> shouldn-t-do-anything-about-wild-animal-suffering) – is it possible to do
> anything about it? _Should_ we do anything about it? Even though the general
> principles that inform our concern for animal welfare shouldn’t be
> arbitrarily limited to animals outside the wild, I think intervention on any
> serious scale would be ill-advised. The natural order is deeply
> interconnected, dynamic, and awesomely complex. Drastic action, such as
> ending predation, would plausibly cause the system to collapse into
> nonexistence or end in some other irreversible catastrophe. Sadly, natural
> evil is inextricably built into the biological order.

For me, this is the main argument. Aldo Leopold, the American conservationist
and environmentalist, summarized the concern like this near the end of _A Sand
County Almanac: With other essays on conservation from Round River_ :

There are many things wrong with this line of argument. First, it’s not clear
that a consistent vegan, concerned with the suffering of animals, should feel
rationally compelled to intervene in wild animal suffering. It’s true that
predation, starvation, and so on have been responsible for an unimaginable
amount of suffering over the generations of life on earth. But (in addition to
not being a consequence of human action in the first place) that’s not within
our power to prevent. On the other hand, human beings _are_ responsible for
the existence of factory farming, and it’s entirely within our power to bring
that monstrosity to an end. Unlike industrial farming, predation, starvation,
parasitism, and so on did not result from decisions made by human beings. So
one could argue that since we’re not responsible for it, we don’t have an
obligation to solve it. Secondly, and more importantly, they could argue that
it’s not within our power to ameliorate it even if we decided to do something
about it.

> “In short, a land ethic changes the role of _Homo sapiens_ from conqueror of
> the land-community to plain member and citizen of it. It implies respect for
> his fellow-members, and also respect for the community as such. In human
> history, we have learned (I hope) that the conqueror role is eventually
> self-defeating. Why? Because it is implicit in such a role that the
> conqueror knows, _ex cathedra_ , just what makes the community clock tick,
> and just what and who is valuable, and what and who is worthless, in
> community life. It always turns out that he knows neither, and this is why
> his conquests eventually defeat themselves. In the biotic community, a
> parallel situation exists. Abraham knew exactly what the land was for: it
> was to drip milk and honey into Abraham’s mouth. At the present moment, the
> assurance with which we regard this assumption is inverse to the degree of
> our education. The ordinary citizen today assumes that science knows what
> makes the community clock tick; the scientist is equally sure that he does
> not. He knows that the biotic mechanism is so complex that its workings may
> never be fully understood.”

“Ought implies can” is a plausible moral principle: If you can’t do it, then
you’re not obligated to do it. For instance, no one can find fault in you for
failing to do something that would be physically impossible. In the absence of
some very surprising future technology, we cannot end animal predation. For
the sake of argument, though, let’s say such technology did arrive. Gene
editing is more and more of a reality, and gene drives make it possible to
alter the genetic character of entire populations relatively quickly. It’s not
as if it would violate the laws of physics to alter the genes of predators
such that their physical and psychological attributes were not aimed at
savagely killing and eating other sentient creatures. Science-fictiony, sure.
But it’s not impossible.

An argument that some animal rights activists will defend (though, in my
experience, it’s also defended by _opponents_ of animal rights) is that we
should, as a matter of consistency, try to intervene in wild animal suffering.
“Well, if I take a vegan’s moral principles seriously, then why should my
concern stop with industrial farming? Wild animals arguably have it just as
bad – if not much worse – than farmed animals. A consistent vegan would try to
stop predators from eating animals!” The argument is that if the ethical
principles espoused by animal welfare advocates are applied consistently, then
they’d be committed to intervening in nature, trying to prevent predators from
killing and eating prey. But that’s absurd, so we can reject the principles
defended by vegans and vegetarians. It’s crazy to stop a lion from eating a
gazelle, so I can go to McDonald’s later guilt-free. At least, that’s how it
goes with the opponents of animal rights – it’s a reductio meant to invalidate
vegan moral principles. There are, however, many vegans who argue that we
ought to reduce wild animal suffering as well. The argument is similar in both
cases: The general principles that inform our concern for animal welfare
shouldn’t be arbitrarily limited to animals that aren’t living in the wild.

Although I do believe that if humanity survives long enough and continues to
advance technologically, we truly may have the power to end devastating
suffering altogether, at least within a relatively large swath of the
observable universe. Maybe.

Tagged [aldo leopold](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/aldo-
leopold/), [animal ethics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-
ethics/), [animal
liberation](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-liberation-2/),
[animal rights](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-rights/),
[animal welfare](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-welfare/),
[enviromentalism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/enviromentalism/),
[ethics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ethics/), [factory
farming](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/factory-farming/), [moral
philosophy](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/moral-philosophy/),
[peter singer](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/peter-singer/),
[veganism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/veganism/),
[vegetarianism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/vegetarianism/),
[wild animal suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/wild-
animal-suffering/)

It is unfortunate that God, in his infinite wisdom, designed a biological
order with evil built into the very structure of creation, but it’s not within
our power to bring an end to predation. It _is_ within our power to bring an
end to an unusual cultural practice that didn’t exist until somewhat recently:
factory farming. What’s more, we’re actually responsible for that.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F07%2F25%2Fwe-probably-shouldnt-do-anything-about-wild-animal-suffering%2F&signup_flow=account)

> “…for practical purposes I am fairly sure, judging from man’s past record of
> attempts to mold nature to his own aims, that we would be more likely to
> increase the net amount of animal suffering if we interfered with wildlife,
> than to decrease it.”

However, even with such technology, we can’t end animal predation without
causing a massive disruption in the ecosystem. We’re talking about drastically
altering central attributes of a very complex, interconnected, dynamic,
highly-emergent system. Even if eliminating predation was realistic,
eliminating predation _and_ expecting everything else to remain fixed in place
is fairly absurd. It would make the asteroid that killed the dinosaurs look
like a footnote in earth’s history! One of the lessons of climate change, I
thought, was that relatively subtle changes, like slightly altering the
composition of the atmosphere, could lead to dramatic consequences. Given the
interconnectedness of the natural order, waving a technological wand and
eliminating predation would plausibly cause the entire system to collapse into
nonexistence. It would be like surgically removing the spine of an elephant
and expecting everything else to carry on as before. Even if eliminating
predation while still feeding predators was realistic, doing so and expecting
everything else to remain fixed in place is not.

When it’s said that “Love is just a chemical reaction,” or “Humans are just
bags of chemicals,” it’s the “just” that I have a problem with. Love _is_ a
chemical reaction—it is not _just_ a chemical reaction. Tunnel vision
reductionists take one description of reality and declare it to be the _real_
description of reality to the exclusion of all others. At the very least, the
given lower level of description is considered “more true” than higher-level
descriptions. These reductionists arbitrarily eliminate every other
description of the world except one, then act as if they’re the only ones with
the courage to look the hard truth straight in the face. However, if we
describe the biochemical correlates of love, we haven’t described everything
there is to know about love, nor have we given the “real” description of love.
We’ve provided _a_ description (one that’s often useful), but there are many
legitimate ways of talking about our world – scientific and non-scientific.
Even strictly in the realm of scientific inquiry, it doesn’t make sense to
choose one way of talking about reality to the exclusion of all others.

It’s inevitable that one who calls out reductionism of any sort will be viewed
with a certain amount of suspicion. You might find yourself being accused of
ignorance, or romanticism, or of harboring some anti-scientific prejudice.
Nevertheless I want to address a common type of reductionism, which I’ll call
[tunnel vision
reductionism](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q5QJdUMh-0A&t=1s).

The basic problem with tunnel vision reductionism is that it has a narrow and
inconsistent notion of “real.” Neurons are taken to be real, but emotions are
illusory (or at least, less real than neurons). Both are considered emergent,
higher-level phenomena, but for some reason, the former is the _true_
description. But if love isn’t real because it’s a higher-level description,
then neurons aren’t real either! Neither are chemicals like oxytocin.

  1. Pingback: [The Dead — Where Are They? 2 Scientific Answer | Bijbelvorser = Bible Researcher](https://bijbelvorser.wordpress.com/2021/05/22/the-dead-where-are-they-2-scientific-answer/)

> “When we talk about air in a room, we can describe it by listing the
> properties of each and every molecule, or we speak in coarse-grained terms
> about things like temperature and pressure. . . . It would be silly to say
> that temperature isn’t ‘real,’ just because the concept doesn’t appear in
> some fine-grained vocabulary. We talk about the world using different levels
> of description, appropriate to the question of interest. . . . Does baseball
> exist? It’s nowhere to be found in the Standard Model of particle physics.
> But any definition of ‘exist’ that can’t find room for baseball seems overly
> narrow to me.”
>
> Sean Carroll, [_Free will is as real as
> baseball_](https://www.preposterousuniverse.com/blog/2011/07/13/free-will-
> is-as-real-as-baseball/)

This poor imitation of real reductionism is based on the fallacious idea that
lower levels of description – in this case, the neurobiological one – are
somehow truer, or even the only true ones. Higher-level descriptions, like the
ones that include purposes and mental states, are mere illusions. But why stop
at the neurobiological level? Why not say that neurons are also illusions,
since they are actually made of atoms? But wait! Atoms too are illusions,
since they are really made of electrons and quarks. Real reductionists
recognize that different languages are useful for different purposes. It’s
silly to say that some aren’t real because they’re emergent (non-fundamental).
If the experience of love isn’t real, then neither is the chemistry underlying
it.

[Listen to this post on Walden Pod. 36 – Is love just a chemical
reaction?](https://audioboom.com/posts/7866220-36-tunnel-vision-reductionism-
is-love-just-a-chemical-reaction)

Two reasons this naïve reductionist tendency is elevated to pet-peeve status
for me is (1) If you criticize it, you’ll sound irrational and anti-science to
many, as if you can’t handle the cold hard truth. (2) Those who affirm this
reductionism, while they’re denying the complexity of reality to make it
easier for them to grasp, appoint themselves as the defenders of science and
reason. They’re pretending the universe is less than it really is in order to
make it simpler to comprehend. If all of human life is really just game theory
or chemical reactions, then it’s a lot easier to wrap your head around it. If
the one true key to understanding lies in evolutionary theory, or the
biochemistry of this or the behavioral psychology of that, then the world
becomes a rational place that’s less challenging to decipher and far less
shrouded in chaos and mystery. They sacrifice the truth for a comforting lie,
and manage to _reverse_ that charge on those who point it out!

“But all this only works if we reject reductive materialism, right?” No! This
is true _especially if_ one accepts reductive materialism. On reductive
materialism, the feeling of love and the chemistry of oxytocin are both real
in _exactly_ the same way.

Carroll defends a view he calls “[poetic
naturalism](https://www.preposterousuniverse.com/poetic-naturalism/),” wherein
“there is only one world, [but] many ways of talking about the world.” Ways of
talking about the world include different theories, models, vocabularies,
stories, and so on. According to Carroll, “if a particular way of talking
turns out to be sufficiently accurate and useful, the elements in its
corresponding vocabulary deserve to be called _real_.” Poetic naturalism is
very nearly the opposite of tunnel vision reductionism. (One additional
instance of the latter: I once spoke to a follower of Ayn Rand who repeatedly
insisted that a romantic relationship is “just a transaction.” Though a
relationship is in some sense transactional, I dare say there’s a bit more
going on than that.)

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F05%2F13%2Ftunnel-vision-reductionism%2F&signup_flow=account)

If you assert that “Love is just a chemical reaction,” and take that to be the
_real_ description, then what are you saying about the evolutionary
description? Or the behavioral description? Let alone the first-person,
subjective description. None of these are biochemical or neurobiological
descriptions, and yet, I still think they’re true. To hone in on one useful
description to the exclusion of all others is indefensible. Especially when
the description _is itself_ a higher-level description, which, by the lights
of the tunnel vision reductionist, means it’s not real! Their notion of “real”
is far too narrow, but it’s also inconsistent. If love isn’t real because it’s
a higher-level description of reality, then neurons aren’t real either.

Tunnel vision reductionism carves the natural world down to a sliver of what
it is in actuality. After it’s safely been diminished to something more
manageable (e.g. behavioral economics, computation, game theory, neurobiology,
evolutionary psychology), building a worldview is a much simpler task.

I think of myself both as an atheist and a naturalist. Naturalists believe
“that reality is exhausted by nature, containing nothing ‘supernatural’.”
There is only the natural world. Naturalism, then, entails that there is no
supernatural being such as God. Whereas, theists believe that in addition to
the natural world – which is common ground between us – there is also a
conscious, personal designer of our world: An unsurpassably great being of
perfect love.

It’s truly hard to exaggerate the staggering amount of suffering endured by
sentient creatures over the generations of evolutionary history, most of which
were non-rational, non-moral agents. This is more than just a little
surprising on the hypothesis that an omnipotent, perfectly loving and moral
being is responsible for the natural world.

_Here’s my opening statement from the recent debate with John Buck on God’s
existence:_

I’d also like to briefly draw attention to something a bit more intangible:
Evolution seems to make for a more comfortable fit with naturalism than it
does with theism. Why else would the majority of believers continue to reject
theistic evolution? Why else would intelligent design and special creation
enduringly claim the lion’s share of Christian believers, even many
generations after the discovery of evolution by natural selection? Because
evolution is an insult to human vanity and doesn’t fit neatly with the
flattering Christian image of ourselves.

**(5)** _Teleological Evil._ Typically, naturalists believe that evolution by
natural selection accounts for the design of the biological order – at least
the broad strokes. Natural selection can at least help us explain the general
shape of the biological order. There are other forces at work, but it’s not as
if there’s an unsurpassably great being that had anything to do with
evolution, on naturalism. And unlike God, natural selection is an impersonal,
indifferent “designer.”

**(4)** _Animal Suffering in Evolutionary History._ There’s an additional
reason evolution is surprising on theism relative to naturalism (probably a
far more important reason). For hundreds of millions of years, an unimaginable
amount of predation, carnivory, starvation, parasitism, languishing, death,
fear and pain has taken place on earth. This is due entirely to God’s choice
to bring about his creation through the pitiless process of evolution. _This_
is the way a perfectly loving being brings about his creation? He could have
created the biological world in many different ways, including ways in which
many millions of Christians already believe he did, _without_ hundreds of
millions of years of animal suffering that could have been avoided entirely.

**(2)** _Divine Hiddenness._ God’s existence is not apparent to many millions
of people, even those who are open to having a relationship with God. They
simply find themselves not believing, involuntarily, through no fault of their
own. We can call this the phenomenon of “reasonable nonbelief.” (If you don’t
think there are any reasonable nonbelievers, you need to get out more.) What
best explains this fact of rational nonbelief in God?

I frankly find this impossible to believe. Nearly every attempted explanation
devolves into incoherence. To make matters worse, untold millions of human
beings, some of them children, have been the victims of psychological
terrorism that arises out of this soteriological fog. Naturalists, of course,
have no difficulty explaining this kind of discord. It would be very
surprising if every religion somehow landed on the same answer about
salvation. Actually, it would be evidence for theism if all the world’s
religions and denominations converged where it really mattered –
soteriological harmony would be good evidence for theism. This is not the
world we see.

**(3)** _Evolution_. Life is the product of evolutionary processes, not
special creation or intelligent design. On naturalism, there is virtually no
other serious contender explaining how humans came about other than evolution
by natural processes. It’s the only game in town for naturalism. But on
theism, God has options – evolution isn’t beforehand a sure bet. God could’ve
used evolution to create life, and some theists believe he did. But he also
could’ve used other methods – methods which are all but impossible on
naturalism. So the fact that humans and all life came about through evolution
is not surprising on naturalism. There is not really any plausible
alternative. For theists, on the other hand, evolution may or may not be true.
In fact – I don’t know if you’ve heard about this – many theists don’t accept
evolution. It just so happens that the option that turns out to be true is the
only one that could have been true on naturalism. In other words, the odds of
evolution are diminished on theism relative to naturalism simply as a matter
of probability. There’s a smaller number of options under naturalism than on
theism.

**(6)** _Divine silence during tragedies._ Say you were a good parent, and you
had a child who needed to visit the doctor and undergo medical treatment. This
treatment wasn’t going to be pleasant, but of course, there’s a good reason
for it. There’s a moral rationale behind the surface-level unpleasantness.
This is essentially what many theists believe about apparent tragedies. There
is some greater moral purpose, some justifying reason that explains why God is
allowing it to happen. We may not know what that moral rationale is, in our
human ignorance – rest assured, there’s a reason. But a good father would be
there for his child in the medical scenario. He would _try_ to explain that
there is a purpose, and what that purpose was, and regardless, he would try to
be a comforting presence. The fact that many victims of tragedies don’t feel
God’s comforting presence is more likely on naturalism than theism.

**(1)** _Soteriological Confusion._ Salvation is a common feature of theism.
Some will be saved, and others will not. That’s a common belief among theists
– _far_ more common than the belief that all shall be saved in the end.
Further, theists often imagine the consequences of lacking salvation to be
eternally significant, involving everything from annihilation to eternal
torment. Once again, very few accept universalism of any kind. Put simply, the
stakes couldn’t be higher. According to the vast majority of theists, an
unmatched _catastrophe_ will result from lacking salvation. That’s terrifying
enough, but worse is that theists do not agree on what’s necessary for
salvation. So most agree that salvation is necessary to avoid terrible
catastrophe, but they do not agree – minor detail – on how to get salvation.

_Teleological evil_ occurs in virtue of the natural purpose of a thing. It is
suffering caused by organisms acting in accordance with one or more of their
natural purposes or their design plan. The biological order – for which God is
ultimately responsible – features much teleological evil.

  1. Pingback: [CA100 A Catholic and an Atheist Debate God | Counter Apologetics](http://counterapologetics.blubrry.net/2022/07/01/ca100-a-catholic-and-an-atheist-debate-god/)

Those who are theists in the audience may have been thinking while I was
presenting my case, “Well, this isn’t a problem for me, because I can explain
divine hiddenness, evolution, animal suffering, and so forth.” I don’t dispute
that you could explain those things! But if you think that undermines my case,
then you’ve misunderstood my case. Merely being able to explain the data and
show that it’s not logically incompatible with your view is a low bar. We want
good explanatory models that predict our observations, in which what we
observe falls out of the model. We don’t want to have to endlessly jump
through hoops simply to account for ordinary observations like the ones I’ve
listed this evening. There’s nothing one can point to and truthfully say, “A
god is absolutely _necessary_ to explain that.” Likewise, there’s no suffering
so appallingly pointless that a believer couldn’t conjure up an explanation
for why an all-good, all-powerful god would continue to behave in a way
indistinguishable from non-existence. Same goes for divine hiddenness,
confusion around salvation, and so on. I think our task is to construct
competing models that explain the evidence, then compare the theistic and non-
theistic models and ask which provides a better explanation of the world, all
things considered. We take a look at the facts of our world – soteriological
confusion, eons of animal suffering, divine hiddenness, teleological evil –
and ask, “Would these facts _be_ facts in a world for which an unsurpassably
great, perfectly loving being is responsible?”

Predation in the wild is the most obvious example. Predators with sharp teeth
and claws tear the flesh off their prey and snap their bones, and often start
feeding on them while they’re still alive. The natural order has been designed
such that animals must savagely kill and devour each other in order to
survive.

It’s one thing to create something that can be misused to cause suffering.
Someone can drown in a bathtub, but it’s not as if the tub has a malevolent
purpose or function. But a predator’s physical and psychological attributes
are aimed at savaging conscious creatures. It’s not an unfortunate by-product,
or a misuse of some ability, or a perversion of nature. Evil has been built
into the very structure of nature.

Tagged [apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/), [biblical
confusion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/biblical-confusion/),
[christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [cumulative
case](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/cumulative-case/),
[debate](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debate/), [divine
hiddenness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/divine-hiddenness/),
[divine silence during
tragedies](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/divine-silence-during-
tragedies/), [does god exist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/does-
god-exist/), [doxastic
discord](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/doxastic-discord/),
[draper](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/draper/),
[evolution](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolution/),
[god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/), [god doesn't
exist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god-doesnt-exist/),
[nagel](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/nagel/),
[Religion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religion/), [religious
confusion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religious-confusion/),
[religious diversity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/religious-
diversity/), [soteriological
confusion](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/soteriological-
confusion/), [soteriological
discord](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/soteriological-discord/),
[swinburne](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/swinburne/),
[youtube](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/youtube/)

It needs to be emphasized that this is not like other disagreements. We
disagree over all sorts of issues about how the world works, but typically
there is no omniscient person who is trying to communicate to us the right
answer. On the other hand, God is a personal being who _is_ trying to
communicate the right answers to soteriological questions – and yet he’s
evidently failing to do so. Despite the best efforts of an omnipotent being
who has our best interests at heart, we’re beset with discord on an issue of
infinite significance.

One final word on this “unknown reasons” strategy that many theists adopt when
faced with tragic suffering. Thomas Nagel once wrote of the problem of evil,
“Even if a theist supposes that the problem has a solution that we humans are
unable to grasp, that would mean that God, who created us with the capacity to
discover the laws of nature and to find the world scientifically intelligible,
has made us incapable of finding the world morally intelligible. These are
powerful reasons for doubt, and they have certainly destroyed the faith of
some believers.” To those theists who appeal to reasons unknown to us, at
least we can agree that the world seems morally unintelligible.

Naturalists tend to believe that evolution by natural selection is primarily
responsible for the general shape of the biological order. Natural selection
is indifferent and amoral. Why wouldn’t purely natural processes occasionally
generate structures aimed at producing suffering for non-moral agents? There’s
nothing for the naturalist to explain here. We’re not the ones who are
committed to saying that there’s some kind of moral rationale behind the
degree, kind, and distribution of suffering in our world. This kind of natural
evil, more so than ordinary natural evil or moral evil, almost seems like a
straightforward disconfirmation of the idea that a perfectly loving and good
being is ultimately responsible for the design of the biological order. I’m
not making that strong of a claim this evening – only that teleological evil
in nature – in other words, malevolent design – is strong evidence against the
hypothesis that nature was designed, directly or indirectly, by an
unsurpassably great being of perfect love and goodness.

Vast numbers of organisms are designed such that they cannot survive unless
they savagely kill and devour each other. Predators _could have_ instead been
scavengers, or herbivores, or some other kind of organism that absorbs energy
without tearing sentient creatures limb from limb. An unimaginable amount of
suffering visited upon confused sentient creatures could have easily been
avoided if God existed.

In the context of arguments from evil, there’s a distinction made between
moral evil and natural evil (an example of moral evil being the misuse of free
will to hurt someone, and an example of natural evil being an earthquake or
other natural disaster). Teleological evil is a subset of natural evil. But
it’s harder to reconcile than ordinary natural evil.

In response to the existence of tragedies, theists will often invoke an
unknown purpose or unknown moral reasons, but this doesn’t affect the point.
Shouldn’t God be comforting the victims of tragedies? Isn’t that what a good
father would do? Some feel his comforting presence in the midst of tragedies,
but many do not. This fact is less surprising on naturalism than it is on
theism.

Here, we’re trying to decide which model best explains the data – as in, which
does a better job of predicting our observations with the fewest assumptions.
It’s clear that if our observations are entailed by one model, but not a rival
model, then it follows that we have evidence favoring the first model over its
rival, since the first assigns a higher probability to our observation than
the second.

So, what should we make of this designer, whoever or whatever it is?
Indifference and amorality seem to be safe inferences: Whoever or whatever is
responsible for the general shape of the biological order is probably
indifferent and amoral. What Hume called “the strange mixture of good and ill
which appears in life” is easily accounted for, on that view. Those who
believe the designer is benevolent and perfectly loving _could_ offer _some_
kind of explanation of the mixture of good and ill, just as those who might
believe in a malevolent designer could offer some kind of explanation of the
mixture of good and ill. But indifference and amorality would make for an
easier fit.

On the naturalist view, theists disagree about important religious questions
for the same reasons that people wear different kinds of clothes and speak
different languages: Geography, familial groups, peer groups, cultural
surroundings, and so on. Theists, on the other hand, have to believe that God
is trying to tell us the right answer, yet somehow, the answer is unclear. God
_could have_ communicated in such a way that there was no ambiguity, or
designed our minds such that we naturally intuit the right answer. And since
he desires what’s best for us, he has reason to dispel confusion on this
matter of unmatched importance. Clearly, the observation of soteriological
confusion is evidence favoring naturalism over theism.

A range of the data of human experience is _more expected_ and _better
explained_ by naturalism than by theism:

> People who accuse us of putting in too much violence [should see] what we
> leave on the cutting-room floor.
>
> David Attenborough

> The problem of teleological evil differs from the problem of dysteleology in
> that while the latter appeals to poor design as evidence against a supremely
> intelligent designer, the former appeals to good design (in particular,
> design that’s well-suited for causing suffering) as evidence against a
> supremely benevolent designer. To put it crudely, the problem of
> dysteleology is the problem of stupid design; the problem of teleological
> evil is the problem of malevolent design.
>
> Felipe Leon

Think about God’s obscurity. If naturalism is true, there is no great mystery
here. God seems hidden because God doesn’t exist. So of course God’s existence
is not apparent, even to many who are open to a relationship with God and who
even desire to be in relationship with God. Comparatively, theists have less
reason to expect our observations, since, if God exists, it’s not a given that
his existence would be obscured from human beings with whom he desires a
relationship. Genuine divine appearance is _incompatible_ with naturalism, but
not theism. So, however likely we are to observe hiddenness in a theistic
world, the odds are not as high as they are in a naturalistic world. While
theists have a somewhat difficult time puzzling over God’s hiddenness,
naturalists have no hoops to jump through. We have a very straightforward
explanation of divine hiddenness.

In summary, then, we’ve seen six respects in which naturalism provides a
better explanation of the world than theism. For all of these reasons I think
that disbelief in God is eminently reasonable. The cumulative weight of the
evidence tips the scale in favor of atheism. God probably does not exist.

This kind of soteriological confusion is a matter of course on naturalism. On
naturalism, religion is a natural phenomenon, and your religious beliefs are
in large part determined by your geography, your familial and peer groups, and
your immediate cultural surroundings.

The North American short-tailed shrew secretes venom from salivary glands in
its lower jaw to paralyze prey. The point of the paralysis is not to kill the
prey, but to keep it alive for an extended period of time to allow for
prolonged feeding. The shrew can infect its prey and then graze on it for days
until it eventually succumbs to its injuries. The North American short-tailed
shrew is not guilty of wrongdoing. It’s not a moral agent. Neither are
parasitic worms or flesh-eating bacteria. They just have the physical and
psychological attributes they have in the biological order in which they find
themselves, where creatures are pitted against one another in a vicious fight
to the death that has lasted for eons and will continue for eons.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F06%2F27%2Fgod-probably-doesnt-exist%2F&signup_flow=account)

In my rebuttal, I look forward to responding to the arguments that John has
brought to the fore. But first I’d like to build a positive case of my own. I
am going to present a few arguments in support of the claim that God probably
does not exist.

Predation is the clearest example. Predators with sharp teeth and claws tear
the flesh off their prey and snap their bones, and often start feeding on them
while they’re still alive. The natural order has been designed such that
animals must savagely kill and devour each other in order to survive.

It’s one thing to create something that can be misused to cause suffering.
Someone can drown in a bathtub, but it’s not as if the tub has a malevolent
purpose or function. But a predator’s physical and psychological attributes
are aimed at savaging conscious creatures. It’s not an unfortunate byproduct,
or a misuse of some ability, or a perversion of nature. It’s how the system
has been designed to work.

> “With respect to the theological view of the question: This is always
> painful to me. I am bewildered. I had no intention to write atheistically,
> but . . . I cannot persuade myself that a beneficent and omnipotent God
> would have designedly created the Ichneumonidae [parasitic wasp] with the
> express intention of their feeding within the living bodies of
> caterpillars.”
>
> Charles Darwin

The North American short-tailed shrew secretes venom from salivary glands in
its lower jaw to paralyze prey. The point of the paralysis is not to kill the
prey, but to keep it alive for an extended period of time to allow for
prolonged feeding. The shrew can infect its prey and then graze on it for days
until it eventually succumbs to its injuries. The North American short-tailed
shrew is not guilty of wrongdoing. It’s not a moral agent. Of course, I’m not
saying predators are evil; neither are parasitic worms or flesh-eating
bacteria. They just have the physical and psychological attributes they have
in the biological order in which they find themselves, where creatures are
pitted against one another in a vicious fight to the death that has lasted for
eons and will continue for eons.

So, what should we make of this designer, whoever or whatever it is?
Typically, naturalists believe that evolution by natural selection accounts
for the general shape of the biological order. Unlike God, natural selection
is an impersonal, indifferent “designer.” Indifference and amorality seem to
be safe inferences in this case. Whoever or whatever is responsible for the
biological order is probably indifferent and amoral. What Hume called “the
strange mixture of good and ill which appears in life” is easily accounted
for, on that view. Those who believe the designer is benevolent and perfectly
loving _could_ offer _some_ kind of explanation of the mixture of good and
ill, just as those who might believe in a malevolent designer could offer some
kind of explanation of the mixture of good and ill. But indifference and
amorality would make for an easier fit.

Vast numbers of organisms are designed such that they cannot survive – they
cannot feed themselves or their children – unless they savagely kill and
devour each other. Predators _could have_ instead been scavengers, or
herbivores, or some other kind of organism that absorbs energy without tearing
sentient creatures limb from limb. A staggering amount of suffering visited
upon confused sentient creatures could have easily been avoided if God
existed.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F06%2F20%2Fteleological-evil%2F&signup_flow=account)

In the context of arguments from evil, there’s a distinction made between
moral and natural evil. Teleological evil is a subset of natural evil, though
it’s harder to reconcile than ordinary natural evil:

Tagged [animal suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/animal-
suffering/),
[apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/apologetics/),
[argument from evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/argument-from-
evil/), [arguments from
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments-from-evil/),
[atheism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheism/),
[atheist](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/atheist/),
[christian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christian/),
[christianity](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/christianity/),
[counter apologetics](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/counter-
apologetics/), [darwin](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/darwin/),
[evolution](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolution/),
[evolutionary animal
suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolutionary-animal-
suffering/), [evolutionary
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolutionary-evil/),
[evolutionary
suffering](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/evolutionary-
suffering/), [felipe leon](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/felipe-
leon/), [god](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/god/),
[Ichneumonidae](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/ichneumonidae/),
[malevolent design](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/malevolent-
design/), [predation](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/predation/),
[problem of evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/problem-of-
evil/), [problem of teleological
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/problem-of-teleological-
evil/), [quentin smith](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/quentin-
smith/), [teleological argument from
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/teleological-argument-from-
evil/), [teleological
evil](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/teleological-evil/)

We need not make that strong of a claim. More modestly, we could maintain that
teleological evil in nature – in other words, malevolent design – is strong
evidence against the hypothesis that nature was designed, directly or
indirectly, by an unsurpassably great being of perfect love and goodness.

> Not long ago I was sleeping in a cabin in the woods and was awoken in the
> middle of the night by the sounds of a struggle between two animals. Cries
> of terror and extreme agony rent the night, intermingled with the sounds of
> jaws snapping bones and flesh being torn from limbs. One animal was being
> savagely attacked, killed and then devoured by another.
>
> A clearer case of a horrible event in nature, a natural evil, has never been
> presented to me. It seemed to me self-evident that the natural law that
> animals _must savagely kill and devour each other in order to survive_ was
> an evil natural law and that the obtaining of this law was sufficient
> evidence that God did not exist.

> “Teleological evil appears to be a much more formidable problem for theism
> than mere moral evil or non-teleological natural evil. Perhaps the most
> obvious reason is that unlike teleological evil, moral and (non-
> teleological) natural evil involve no clear or otherwise natural presumption
> that such evil was intended by God. . . . By contrast, with teleological
> evil, it is part of the very design plan and natural purpose or function of
> an entity that it causes evil. In such cases, it is natural to infer that if
> there is a god, then it is part of the very intention of God to ensure
> horrific suffering…”
>
> Felipe Leon

Naturalists tend to believe that evolution by natural selection is primarily
responsible for the biological order. Natural selection is indifferent and
amoral. Why wouldn’t purely natural processes occasionally generate structures
aimed at producing suffering for non-moral agents? There’s nothing for the
naturalist to explain here. We’re not the ones who are committed to saying
that there’s some kind of moral rationale behind the degree, kind, and
distribution of suffering in our world. But this kind of natural evil, more so
than ordinary natural evil or moral evil, almost seems like a straightforward
disconfirmation of the idea that a perfectly loving and good being is
ultimately responsible for the design of the biological order.

This has so far been primarily based on Leon’s problem of teleological evil. A
distinct but related argument comes to us from [Quentin Smith in his 1991
article, _An Atheological Argument from Evil Natural
Laws_](https://infidels.org/library/modern/quentin-smith-evil-laws/):

> “People who accuse us of putting in too much violence [should see] what we
> leave on the cutting-room floor.”
>
> David Attenborough

Darwin was disturbed by a case of _teleological evil_ : Teleological evil
occurs in virtue of the natural purpose of a thing. It is suffering caused by
organisms acting in accordance with one or more of their natural purposes or
their design plan. This is not the problem of unintelligent design. “To put it
crudely,” [writes Felipe Leon](http://exapologist.blogspot.com/2017/06/the-
problem-of-teleological-evil.html), “the problem of dysteleology is the
problem of stupid design; the problem of teleological evil is the problem of
malevolent design.”

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Femersongreenblog.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F06%2F10%2Fmysterianism-rational-pessimism-in-the-metaphysics-of-consciousness%2F&signup_flow=account)

One caveat worth noting: even if one accepts Chomsky’s conceptual distinction
between problems and mysteries, given the difficulty of figuring out which
questions are which – problems or mysteries – it may be best to
methodologically pretend there are no mysteries. We could mistake a problem
for a mystery, and fail to pursue what could have been a fruitful line of
inquiry. Talk about insoluble mysteries may discourage exploration that could
be useful in ways we couldn’t have predicted beforehand. If we took the
mysterian attitude in other areas, some things would never have gotten done.
In practice, the question of how to identify mysteries is about as vexing as
the mysteries themselves.

Not only do we know what consciousness is, _all we know_ is consciousness.
Everything – _everything_ – comes to us through consciousness. As far as we’re
concerned, there’s _nothing but_ a world of consciousness.

> Now, my own suspicion is that the universe is not only queerer than we
> suppose, but queerer than we can suppose. I have read and heard many
> attempts at a systematic account of it, from materialism and theosophy to
> the Christian system or that of Kant, and I have always felt that they were
> much too simple. I suspect that there are more things in heaven and earth
> than are dreamed of, or can be dreamed of, in any philosophy.

Of course, if you _are_ satisfied with some option, then don’t let me rain on
your parade. I’m only explaining what the motivation for mysterianism might
be. If you find yourself in the state of mind, as I sometimes do, that there
are no good options on the table, then mysterianism begins to seem very
attractive. (I remember when I first started talking about panpsychism, I
described it as “the worst option except for all the other ones,” echoing the
adage about democracy. So this isn’t a change of pace for me.)

No doubt, there are truths that simply cannot be grasped by the human mind.
Given who we are and how we got here, why would we expect anything else? Our
intuitions evolved to help us survive and reproduce as social animals in our
environment. They’re mostly trustworthy within their domains. But that’s just
it – they have domains. Our minds are not _unlimited_ and did not evolve so we
could understand everything. In fact, you might have been selected _against_
had you been walking on the savannah contemplating the nature of the universe
rather than paying attention to the more immediate goings-on in your
environment.

In a review of Luke Roelofs’ book on panpsychism, _Combining Minds_ ,
[Schwitzgebel commented](https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/combining-minds-how-to-
think-about-composite-subjectivity/),

As I mentioned earlier, I worry about this kind of sentiment. On the one hand,
Haldane and Chomsky are undeniably correct. But the issue of _identifying_
mysteries in practice is what worries me. What if mysterianism is a self-
fulfilling prophecy? What if we’re discouraging people from seeking answers
when there are answers out there to be found?

Assuming we’re playing the “metaphysics of consciousness” game at all, I think
we have three broad options: (1) unifying mind and matter in some kind of
intelligible and satisfying way (2) separating mind and matter in some kind of
intelligible and satisfying way (3) recognizing that there will never be an
intelligible and satisfying resolution to this problem. I spend the most time
exploring option (1), defending my preferred way of unifying mind and matter
and criticizing the more mainstream ways of doing so. Trailing far behind in
second is option (2), dualism. But what about option (3)? Mysterianism, I
think, has a lot going for it. There certainly are mysteries (as far as humans
are concerned), and accounting for consciousness _may_ be one of those
mysteries. But why think we’ve stumbled on a genuine mystery here? It _could_
be the case, but why think it _is_ the case? Let’s take a brief look at
several different arguments that have been offered.

Though, truth be told, I’m not totally convinced we have a genuine mystery on
our hands. That’s why I’m actively exploring panpsychist and dualist accounts
of mind and matter instead of doing something else. But here’s one reason I’m
attracted to mysterianism: (A) we know there are mysteries, and (B) we have
arguably not made a ton of progress on deciding which metaphysical theory of
consciousness, if any, is actually true. If consciousness and its place in
nature is a genuine mystery, then the lack of concrete progress is to be
expected. Mysterianism would cleanly explain why we’ve moved past vitalism,
but haven’t been able to move past the same materialist vs. dualist vs.
panpsychist vs. idealist debates that were taking place centuries ago. So I’m
making what could be considered two distinct arguments here: pessimistic
induction and inference to the best explanation. As for the latter, we can
safely say that mysterianism would predict the gargantuan fray of conflicting
theories that never seem to resolve into a stable consensus. There are
ephemeral trends, but any survey of the history of the metaphysics of
consciousness will reveal an ebb and flow of opinion that never seems to find
equilibrium. This is to be expected on a mysterian view. So, one might
inductively infer from this history that no stable answer will be reached; and
they might add that this failure of significant progress is better predicted
by the mysterian hypothesis.

It should be noted that for something to rise to the level of mystery, it does
not need to be inexplicable in principle to _all_ hypothetical beings. It
wouldn’t have to be inexplicable even to God, for instance. Whether there are
any mysteries in this superlative sense is an interesting question. But a
belief in the rationality of the universe leads me to think that any apparent
in-principle mysteries are really the product of badly-formed questions or
going beyond our limitations. For our purposes, we need not take a position on
whether there are in-principle mysteries in nature – only whether there are
mysteries as far as human beings are concerned.

One motivation for mysterianism stems from a dissatisfaction with existing
theories of consciousness, and perhaps glimpsing what seem to be in-principle
reasons that certain problems cannot be resolved. After being left thoroughly
unimpressed with each option in the metaphysics of consciousness, one might
reasonably conclude that the entire enterprise was doomed to begin with. As
explained by Chomsky earlier, our minds have limited domains, and there’s no
great reason to expect “understanding the metaphysics of consciousness” to
fall within our domain of understanding.

What are some other reasons one might be a mysterian? I’ve heard it suggested
that there may be a catch-22 at work here — our brains could never evolve to
be sophisticated enough to understand themselves. We can understand simpler
creatures, but we can’t turn our own cognitive capacities inward and gain a
comprehensive understanding. In order to understand our minds as they
currently exist, we’d have to become significantly more advanced minds. And at
that point, we’d still not be able to understand ourselves! That may or may
not bear on the hard problem of consciousness, whether consciousness is
physical or non-physical, and so on. The aim of mysterianism is to establish
that there are some limitations to our inquiry that cannot be overcome by
human minds. For one reason or another, we aren’t in a good position to affirm
theories of consciousness with a high degree of confidence.

> If there’s one thing we know about the metaphysics of consciousness, it is
> that something bizarre must be true. Among the reasons to think so: Every
> well-developed theory of consciousness in the entire history of written
> philosophy on Earth has either been radically bizarre on its face or had
> radically bizarre consequences.

The “weak mysterian” or “temporary mysterian” position holds out hope that
some future revolution will show how to close the explanatory gap. One who
holds this moderate view says that what may look unbridgeable in principle is
really just an impermanent roadblock. We may not have anything approaching a
satisfying explanation of subjective experience now, but we could in the
future. We should keep trying. This is optimism of a sort, but it shouldn’t be
misinterpreted as validation of any of the existing options, which any
mysterian will regard as inadequate. What we need is a paradigm shift:

Here’s one final reason one might be attracted to mysterianism. A version of
the view can rest on a foundation of agnosticism. Many theories of
consciousness, as [Philip Goff
explains](https://conscienceandconsciousness.com/2020/10/29/is-it-the-job-of-
science-or-philosophy-to-account-for-consciousness/),

So, if you’ve ever found yourself thinking “These are all terrible options,”
then mysterianism might be for you. But it doesn’t need to be framed
negatively. We could just as easily reframe it positively: everyone makes
really convincing arguments against opposing views. When materialists level
objections to dualism, they’re right! They’re offering good arguments. When
non-physicalists level objections to physicalism, they’re right! They’re
offering good arguments. Rather than thinking “All these options suck,” you
could just as well think that everyone is making cogent points all around.
There are good arguments against materialism, dualism, panpsychism, and so on;
there are really compelling reasons to reject each of these options. Maybe
there are deep, in principle reasons we can’t come up with a satisfying
explanation of consciousness.

The problem is that the question “What is consciousness?” is ambiguous. As
outlined a moment ago, there are at least two senses in which it’s profoundly
mistaken to think that we don’t know what consciousness is. (It’s even a
little strange to pose the question in the first place, since consciousness is
just…this.) But there’s a sense in which it’s not at all unreasonable to say
that the nature of consciousness is mysterious: we don’t know which account of
consciousness is true. Of course, in that case, there are better ways to
present the question. “What is consciousness?” is not a clear formulation of
the question of whether substance dualism, epiphenomenal property dualism,
reductive materialism, Russellian panpsychism, or any of our other
metaphysical theories of consciousness are close to the mark. This is the area
in which pessimism about “the mystery of consciousness” is an eminently
reasonable position to defend. The name for this pessimistic view is
_mysterianism_.

> Every day, it seems, some verifiably intelligent person tells us that we
> don’t know what consciousness is. The nature of consciousness, they say, is
> an awesome mystery. . . . I find this odd because we know exactly what
> consciousness is — where by “consciousness” I mean what most people mean in
> this debate: experience of any kind whatever. It’s the most familiar thing
> there is, whether it’s experience of emotion, pain, understanding what
> someone is saying, seeing, hearing, touching, tasting or feeling. It is in
> fact the only thing in the universe whose ultimate intrinsic nature we can
> claim to know. It is utterly unmysterious.
>
> [Galen Strawson](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/16/opinion/consciousness-
> isnt-a-mystery-its-matter.html)

Mysterianism seems a bit defeatist, but it nonetheless may be true. There are
times when our minds bump up against their cognitive ceiling, and explaining
consciousness could be one of those times. We may never get an intuitively
satisfying answer to this question, just like I’ll never have an intuitively
satisfying answer to whether the universe is infinite or finite. To me, both
possibilities seem equally hard to concretely imagine. Maybe I’m asking the
wrong question, or maybe I’m like a golden retriever trying to grasp the
concept of a prime number. Either way, I’m not going to get a really
satisfying answer.

Mysterians believe that we will probably never know how conscious experience
and the physical world fit together. Human beings are incapable of resolving
the hard problem of consciousness. In other words, the true explanation of
subjective experience – whatever it is – is not something we could
appreciate.[ As Colin McGinn put
it](https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/books/first/m/mcginn-
flame.html), “Consciousness indubitably exists, and it is connected to the
brain in some intelligible way, but the nature of this connection necessarily
eludes us.” There’s also a weaker form of mysterianism, which we’ll get into a
bit later. (Both are reasonable, in my view, but the more uncompromising
version is the one I find attractive.)

> are empirically equivalent: there is no experiment that can decide between
> them. That’s not really a surprise, as this is not a purely empirical
> question. It’s rather a question of why something that is publicly
> observable (brain activity) always goes together with something that is not
> publicly observable (subjective experience). This isn’t the kind of question
> an experiment can answer, just as questions about the fundamental character
> of ethics can’t be answered experimentally. One option is agnosticism. If we
> can’t decide between these views experimentally, then maybe we should simply
> say that we don’t know which is true.

It seems as if there’s no objective way of settling this debate, and it’s
unclear whether the non-empirical resources we do have at our disposal are
adequate to establish a significant credence in _any_ metaphysical theory of
consciousness. It’s not that Theory A can’t be significantly more probable
than Theory B. Our credence is Theory A can be high _relative to_ some
competitor, but not high in an absolute sense. There’s just not much to work
from. If no publicly-available data can settle the issue, and no philosophical
method seems able to yield any degree of intersubjective agreement, then maybe
we should consider the idea that we are unable to solve the problem, or just
asking bad questions.

For now, I’ll keep pursuing my various non-physicalist interests. If those
lead me to the same dead end that physicalism led me to, then I’ll add this to
the list of things Noam Chomsky was right about.

According to Chomsky, there’s a conceptual distinction between problems and
mysteries. There are many problems which fall within our cognitive capacities
which may be difficult, but are solvable. On the other hand, there are
mysteries, which fall beyond the finite domain of our cognitive capacities.
Problems are things we _could_ solve, but mysteries are insoluble –
inexplicable to the minds of human beings, just as general relativity is
inexplicable to the mind of a raccoon. (Mysteries are species-relative: what’s
a mystery to a Martian might not be a mystery to us.)

> The brain is a product of evolution, and just as animal brains have their
> limitations, we have ours. Our brains can’t hold a hundred numbers in
> memory, can’t visualize seven-dimensional space and perhaps can’t
> intuitively grasp why neural information processing observed from the
> outside should give rise to subjective experience on the inside. This is
> where I place my bet, though I admit that the theory could be demolished
> when an unborn genius—a Darwin or Einstein of consciousness—comes up with a
> flabbergasting new idea that suddenly makes it all clear to us.
>
> [Steven
> Pinker](http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1580394-6,00.html)

Unlike mysterians, I think there are __ plausible options on the table. I rank
some kind of dual-aspect monism first (e.g. panpsychism, though I think some
consciousness-only monisms can also be squeezed into this category); second,
some version of dualism; and strong mysterianism third. So to be clear, I’m
not defending mysterianism as my first choice. Nonetheless, I think it’s a far
more plausible idea than flat-footed reductive materialism.

Since we’re organisms produced by evolution, we have a cognitive structure
that has a scope and limits, just as our physical structure has a scope and
limits. We can run, but we can’t fly. We can solve some mathematical problems,
but we can’t solve the hard problem or establish a satisfactory theory of
consciousness. Or so the mysterian argues.

> The “new mysterianism,” I believe, is misnamed. It should be called “truism”
> — at least, for anyone who accepts the major findings of modern biology,
> which regards humans as part of the organic world. If so, then they will be
> like all other organisms in having a genetic endowment that enables them to
> grow and develop to their mature form. . . . The endowment that yields scope
> also establishes limits.
>
> [Noam Chomsky](https://chomsky.info/201401__/)

> Certain fundamental questions about the metaphysics of mind can’t, it seems,
> be settled by science, in anything like its current state, or by abstract
> reasoning. To address these questions we must turn to common sense. If we
> then have good reason to think that common sense, too, is no reliable guide,
> we are unmoored. Without common sense as a constraint, the possibilities
> open up, bizarre and beautiful in their different ways; and once open they
> refuse to shut.

The stronger form of mysterianism – the kind associated with Noam Chomsky, for
instance – is far more pessimistic about gaining anything like a complete
understanding of consciousness, as well as other mysteries that fall beyond
our cognitive purview:

Many of these theories, he adds, “seem to leave common sense farther behind
the more specific they become,” leading him to the conclusion that “no non-
bizarre general theory of consciousness is available,” and, he suspects, not
even constructable in principle. [He
argues](http://www.faculty.ucr.edu/~eschwitz/SchwitzPapers/CrazyMind-130712.pdf)
that the truth in the metaphysics of mind is bound to be contrary to common
sense; and that we would not feel compelled to believe the right answer if it
was staring us in the face. Something “crazy . . . must be among the core
truths about . . . the metaphysics of mind.”

In practice, it may be difficult to identify mysteries. We’ll never know for
certain if our “mystery” is a false positive. This, however, does nothing to
undermine the claim that there _are_ mysteries. Nor does it support the
contrary claim that we have limitless, Godlike intellects whose domain of
applicability is the entirety of nature. That, [as Chomsky
argues](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G8G2QUK_1Wg), is a straightforwardly
anti-evolutionary claim.

> [T]he bond between the mind and the brain is a deep mystery. Moreover, it is
> an ultimate mystery, a mystery that human intelligence will never unravel.
>
> [Colin
> McGinn](https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/books/first/m/mcginn-
> flame.html)

Echoes of this can be found in Schwitzgebel’s case discussed earlier, but Goff
is far more optimistic about the possibility of using reason to resolve the
problem and reach an intelligible and satisfying theory of consciousness. I
tentatively share Goff’s optimism, as I’m not ready to give up and embrace the
mystery quite yet. Nevertheless, we should heed the words of biologist J.B.S.
Haldane, who said in 1927,

Tagged [arguments](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/arguments/),
[chomsky](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/chomsky/), [chomsky
mysterian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/chomsky-mysterian/),
[consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/consciousness/),
[debate](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/debate/),
[dennett](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/dennett/),
[explained](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/explained/),
[goff](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/goff/),
[haldane](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/haldane/), [hard
problem](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/hard-problem/), [hard
problem of consciousness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/hard-
problem-of-consciousness/),
[iep](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/iep/),
[introduction](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/introduction/),
[mcginn](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mcginn/),
[mysterian](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mysterian/),
[mysterianism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/mysterianism/), [new
mysterianism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/new-mysterianism/),
[new mysterians](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/new-mysterians/),
[noam chomsky mysterianism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/noam-
chomsky-mysterianism/),
[panpsychism](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/panpsychism/),
[philosophy of mind](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/philosophy-of-
mind/), [pinker](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/pinker/),
[qualia](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/qualia/),
[roelofs](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/roelofs/),
[schwitzgebel](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/schwitzgebel/),
[sep](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/sep/),
[weird](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/weird/),
[weirdness](https://emersongreenblog.wordpress.com/tag/weirdness/)

Of course, this practical demarcation problem doesn’t change the fact that
there _are_ mysteries (as far as we human beings are concerned) and that we
are biological organisms with a certain cognitive and physical structure –
structures which have domains of applicability and inapplicability. After all,
what’s the alternative? That we have infinite, Godlike intellects with
literally no limitations?

There’s a sense in which this is clearly wrong. You know what consciousness is
simply by virtue of being a conscious creature. Of course, the inner life of a
subject does not immediately reveal how to _explain_ consciousness, (i.e.
which metaphysical or scientific account of consciousness is correct), but it
does immediately answer the opening question of “What is consciousness?” When
it comes to subjective experience, the having is the knowing: you know what
consciousness is by virtue of undergoing conscious experiences. In fact,
that’s the only way you _could_ know.

[Eric Schwitzgebel argues
that](http://www.faculty.ucr.edu/~eschwitz/SchwitzPapers/CrazyMind-130712.pdf)
the reason we haven’t made the kind of progress one might have hoped for is
that we have no reliable guide. No matter which side you take, it’s impossible
to avoid doing violence to common sense at _some_ point. Furthermore, science
isn’t as helpful as usual, and abstract reasoning can’t seem to lead to
convergence.

What is consciousness? This intractable question, it’s often said, is a great
mystery that philosophers and scientists will struggle to decipher for ages to
come.

