And now for something not very philosophical. Today, in front of two witnesses
and two timekeepers and with the help of Levi Durham doing an amazing feat of
belaying me for an hour, I beat the [Guinness World
Record](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/438677-greatest-
vertical-distance-climbed-on-an-artificial-climbing-wall-in-1-hour-indi) in
greatest vertical distance climbed in one hour on an indoor climbing wall. The
previous record was 928.5m and I did 1013.7m (with about half a minute to
spare). On Baylor's climbing wall, this involved 67 climbs divided into sets
of 10 (the last was 7), with about a minute of rest between sets (the clock
kept on running during the rest).

In the morning I stress-baked pumpkin muffins for myself and the volunteers. I
had the muffins, water and loose chalk on a table for use during breaks.

Since Guinness requires video proof in addition to human witnesses, in the
interests of redundancy, I had three cameras pointed at the attempt. The best
footage (above) is from a Sony A7R2 with a zoom lens at 16mm, producing 1080P
at 59.94 fps. Video was processed with Adobe Premiere Rush. The processing
consisted of trimming the start and end, and adding a timing video track I
generated with a [Python OpenCV2
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/3a705c859d4ea4a482c4e47e96a08f79),
synchronized with single-frame precision at the 1:00:00 point with the footage
of Giant Stopwatch (barely visible under the table towards the end of the
video; early in the video, glare hides it). For the unofficial version I link
above, I accelerated the middle climbs 10X in Premiere Rush.

About half-way through, I ducked into the storage area inside the rock and
changed to a dry shirt.

A Kindle Fire running a pre-release version of my [Giant
Stopwatch](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=omegacentauri.mobi.simplestopwatch&hl=en_US&gl=US)
app provided unofficial timing for audience to see and for my pacing. I had to
modify the app to have a periodic beep to meet Guinness's requirements of an
audible stop signal.

On the ground there was a sheet of paper with the start and end times of each
break printed in large letters (calculated by [this
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/10e364904dfcc19b043a594232e0acde)), as
well as the mid-point time for each set of 10 to keep me better on pace.

I climbed in sets of 10. The planned pace was 8:18 per set and a 44-45 second
rest between sets (clock runs during rests,), averaging at 49.8 seconds per
climb including descent. I was always ahead of pace, and I occasionally took a
mini break at the mid-point time if I was too far ahead.

Most of my practice was with an auto-belay, and at a shorter distance per
climb (and hence greater number of climbs needed) since the auto-belay makes
it impossible to get to the top of the wall. The auto-belay is also spring
loaded so it effectively decreases body weight (by 7 lbs at the bottom
according to my measurement). Then a couple of weeks ago the auto-belay was
closed by management due to a maintenance issue, and I had a break in training
until the Wednesday before the official attempt when I trained with a manual
belay.

I wore moderately worn (one small hole) and comfortable 5.10 Anasazi shoes, a
Camp USA Energy harness, shorts and a T-shirt. (I have not received any
sponsorship.) My belayer used a tube-style device and wore belay gloves.

I trained for about three months, not very heavily. In training did two
unofficial full-length practice runs, and in each I beat the previous record:
in the first one I got 947.1 meters and in the second I got 1004.5, so I was
pretty confident I could beat the 928.5 meters on the official attempt (though
I was still pretty nervous). I also trained by doing a small number of
approximately 1/2 or 1/3 sized practices (maybe three or so), and more regular
shorter runs (1-10 climbs) at fast pace.

The route was a standard 5.7 grade for most of my training (including when I
unofficially beat the records), with Rock management kindly agreeing to keep
the route up for several months for me. For the final attempt, we added holds
to make the finish at the top of the wall, and changed three other holds to
easier ones. (Guinness has no route grade requirements.)

You should make a living out of that, Alex.  
Would give you a lot less stress.

The top of the wall is 15.13 meters vertically from the ground (as measured by
a geology grad student), at 3.5 degree slab.

I was actually really stressed yesterday. I had already beaten the record
unofficially in practice, but with lots of people coming to watch (local
climbers, grad students and colleagues), I didn't want to disappoint.
Contributing to the stress was that the conditions changed from my practice
runs (the auto-belay was down from maintenance and I had to use a manual
belay; this involved lengthening the route slightly, increasing the length of
each set and decreasing the total count, as well as an effective increase in
my weight since the auto-belay subtracts a few pounds due to its spring-
loading), and that I hadn't been able to train on the particular route for
several weeks prior to Wednesday due to the auto-belay being down for
maintenance while on Wednesday's approximately half-distance-at-half-time
practice I was more tired at the end than I should have been due to poor
pacing.

Second, “lethal” weapons can be used less than lethally. For instance, with
modern medicine, abdominal gunshot wounds are only 10% fatal, yet they are no
doubt very effective at stopping an attacker. While it may seem weird to
imagine a pacifist shooting someone in the stomach, when the chance of
survival is 90%, it does not seem unreasonable to say that the pacifist could
be aiming to stop the attacker non-lethally. After all, tasers sometimes kill,
too. They do so less than 0.25% of the time, but that’s a difference of degree
rather than of principle.

First, we have “officially” non-lethal weapons: tasers, gas, etc. Some of
these might violate current international law, but it seems that a pacifist
country could modify its commitment to some accords.

I’ve been wondering whether it is possible for a country to count as pacifist
and yet wage a defensive war. I think the answer is positive, as long as one
has a moderate pacifism that is opposed to lethal violence but not to all
violence. I think that a prohibition of all violence is untenable. It seems
obvious that if you see someone about to shoot an innocent person, and you can
give the shooter a shove to make them miss, you presumptively should.

Whether such a limited way of waging war could be successful probably depends
on the case. If one combined the non-lethal (or not intentionally lethal)
means with technological and numerical superiority, it wouldn’t be surprising
to me if one could win.

Third, we might subdivide moderate pacifists based on whether they prohibit
all violence that foreseeably leads to death or just violence that
intentionally leads to death. If it is only intentionally lethal violence that
is forbidden, then quite a bit of modern warfare can stand. If the enemy is
attacking with tanks or planes, one can intentionally destroy the tank or
plane as a weapon, while only foreseeing, without intending, the death of the
crew. (I don’t know how far one can take this line without sophistry. Can one
drop a bomb on an infantry unit intending to smash up their rifles without
intending to kill the soldiers?) Similarly, one can bomb enemy weapons
factories.

These may seem to be consequentialist arguments. I don't think so. I don't
have the same intuitions if we replace the general by the general's innocent
child in (2) and (4), even if killing the child were to stop the war (e.g., by
making the general afraid that their other children would be murdered).

So maybe our choice is between tasing a million, thereby non-intentionally
killing 250 soldiers, and intentionally killing one general. It seems to me
that (2) is morally preferable, even though our moderate pacifist has to allow
(1) and forbid (2).

Very well. Now consider this on a national level. Suppose there are a million
enemy soldiers ordered to commit genocide against ten million, and you have
two ways to stop them:

Imagine a moderate pacifist who rejects lethal self-defense, but allows non-
lethal self-defense when appropriate, say by use of tasers.

Note that a version of this argument goes through even if the moderate
pacifist backs up and says that tasers are too lethal. For suppose instead of
tasers we have drones that destroy the dominant hand of an enemy soldier while
guaranteeing survival (with science fictional medical technology). It’s
clearly right to release such a drone on a soldier who is about to kill ten
innocents. But now compare:

I think (4) is still morally preferable to causing the kind of disruption to
the lives of a million people that plan (3) would involve.

If you can tase one person to stop the murder of ten, then (1) should be
permissible if it’s the only option. But tasers occasionally kill people. We
don’t know how often. Apparently it’s [less than 1 in
400](https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/investigations/2021/04/23/police-
use-tasers-ends-hundreds-deaths-like-daunte-wright/7221153002/) uses. Suppose
it’s 1 in 4000. Then option (1) results in 250 enemy deaths.

Alex  
  
Of course one should never murder anyone, but the question is: would killing
Putin be murder?

Now, imagine that one person is attacking you and nine other innocents, with
the intent of killing the ten of you, and you can stop them with a taser.
Surely you should, and surely the moderate pacifist will say that this is an
appropriate use case for the taser.

Alex  
  
Doesn't you post here entail that we should murder Putin?

One should never murder anyone. Killing, on the other hand, can sometimes be
justified.  
  
One question about killing the leader of an invading country is whether the
leader counts as a civilian, since the killing of civilians is forbidden by
the Geneva Convention. There is also some worry about the Geneva Convention's
killing by "perfidy", which is taken to rule out at least some assassinations.
So, as a matter of positive international law, it seems a difficult question.  
  
Were there no international law on the matter, I wouldn't see a significant
difference between killing a political leader and killing a general, if both
are giving orders to fight. Morally speaking, but not necessarily in
international law, both seem to me to be equally combatants.  
  
Besides the moral and legal questions, there is also a prudential question. In
my post I assumed that killing the general would stop the invasion. I got to
assume that because I was making up the case. Whether in actual fact killing a
leader would stop an invasion is less clear. Indeed such a thing might be seen
as such a serious attack on the country that the retaliation might be really
horrific.

On the ground there was a sheet of paper with the start and end times of each
break printed in large letters (calculated by [this
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/10e364904dfcc19b043a594232e0acde)), as
well as the mid-point time for each set of 10 to keep me better on pace.

I wore moderately worn (one small hole) and comfortable 5.10 Anasazi shoes, a
Camp USA Energy harness, shorts and a T-shirt. (I have not received any
sponsorship.) My belayer used a tube-style device and wore belay gloves.

About half-way through, I ducked into the storage area inside the rock and
changed to a dry shirt.

I climbed in sets of 10. The planned pace was 8:18 per set and a 44-45 second
rest between sets (clock runs during rests,), averaging at 49.8 seconds per
climb including descent. I was always ahead of pace, and I occasionally took a
mini break at the mid-point time if I was too far ahead.

The route was a standard 5.7 grade for most of my training (including when I
unofficially beat the records), with Rock management kindly agreeing to keep
the route up for several months for me. For the final attempt, we added holds
to make the finish at the top of the wall, and changed three other holds to
easier ones. (Guinness has no route grade requirements.)

I trained for about three months, not very heavily. In training did two
unofficial full-length practice runs, and in each I beat the previous record:
in the first one I got 947.1 meters and in the second I got 1004.5, so I was
pretty confident I could beat the 928.5 meters on the official attempt (though
I was still pretty nervous). I also trained by doing a small number of
approximately 1/2 or 1/3 sized practices (maybe three or so), and more regular
shorter runs (1-10 climbs) at fast pace.

In the morning I stress-baked pumpkin muffins for myself and the volunteers. I
had the muffins, water and loose chalk on a table for use during breaks.

Since Guinness requires video proof in addition to human witnesses, in the
interests of redundancy, I had three cameras pointed at the attempt. The best
footage (above) is from a Sony A7R2 with a zoom lens at 16mm, producing 1080P
at 59.94 fps. Video was processed with Adobe Premiere Rush. The processing
consisted of trimming the start and end, and adding a timing video track I
generated with a [Python OpenCV2
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/3a705c859d4ea4a482c4e47e96a08f79),
synchronized with single-frame precision at the 1:00:00 point with the footage
of Giant Stopwatch (barely visible under the table towards the end of the
video; early in the video, glare hides it). For the unofficial version I link
above, I accelerated the middle climbs 10X in Premiere Rush.

You should make a living out of that, Alex.  
Would give you a lot less stress.

And now for something not very philosophical. Today, in front of two witnesses
and two timekeepers and with the help of Levi Durham doing an amazing feat of
belaying me for an hour, I beat the [Guinness World
Record](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/438677-greatest-
vertical-distance-climbed-on-an-artificial-climbing-wall-in-1-hour-indi) in
greatest vertical distance climbed in one hour on an indoor climbing wall. The
previous record was 928.5m and I did 1013.7m (with about half a minute to
spare). On Baylor's climbing wall, this involved 67 climbs divided into sets
of 10 (the last was 7), with about a minute of rest between sets (the clock
kept on running during the rest).

The top of the wall is 15.13 meters vertically from the ground (as measured by
a geology grad student), at 3.5 degree slab.

A Kindle Fire running a pre-release version of my [Giant
Stopwatch](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=omegacentauri.mobi.simplestopwatch&hl=en_US&gl=US)
app provided unofficial timing for audience to see and for my pacing. I had to
modify the app to have a periodic beep to meet Guinness's requirements of an
audible stop signal.

Most of my practice was with an auto-belay, and at a shorter distance per
climb (and hence greater number of climbs needed) since the auto-belay makes
it impossible to get to the top of the wall. The auto-belay is also spring
loaded so it effectively decreases body weight (by 7 lbs at the bottom
according to my measurement). Then a couple of weeks ago the auto-belay was
closed by management due to a maintenance issue, and I had a break in training
until the Wednesday before the official attempt when I trained with a manual
belay.

I was actually really stressed yesterday. I had already beaten the record
unofficially in practice, but with lots of people coming to watch (local
climbers, grad students and colleagues), I didn't want to disappoint.
Contributing to the stress was that the conditions changed from my practice
runs (the auto-belay was down from maintenance and I had to use a manual
belay; this involved lengthening the route slightly, increasing the length of
each set and decreasing the total count, as well as an effective increase in
my weight since the auto-belay subtracts a few pounds due to its spring-
loading), and that I hadn't been able to train on the particular route for
several weeks prior to Wednesday due to the auto-belay being down for
maintenance while on Wednesday's approximately half-distance-at-half-time
practice I was more tired at the end than I should have been due to poor
pacing.

I’ve been wondering whether it is possible for a country to count as pacifist
and yet wage a defensive war. I think the answer is positive, as long as one
has a moderate pacifism that is opposed to lethal violence but not to all
violence. I think that a prohibition of all violence is untenable. It seems
obvious that if you see someone about to shoot an innocent person, and you can
give the shooter a shove to make them miss, you presumptively should.

Whether such a limited way of waging war could be successful probably depends
on the case. If one combined the non-lethal (or not intentionally lethal)
means with technological and numerical superiority, it wouldn’t be surprising
to me if one could win.

Third, we might subdivide moderate pacifists based on whether they prohibit
all violence that foreseeably leads to death or just violence that
intentionally leads to death. If it is only intentionally lethal violence that
is forbidden, then quite a bit of modern warfare can stand. If the enemy is
attacking with tanks or planes, one can intentionally destroy the tank or
plane as a weapon, while only foreseeing, without intending, the death of the
crew. (I don’t know how far one can take this line without sophistry. Can one
drop a bomb on an infantry unit intending to smash up their rifles without
intending to kill the soldiers?) Similarly, one can bomb enemy weapons
factories.

Second, “lethal” weapons can be used less than lethally. For instance, with
modern medicine, abdominal gunshot wounds are only 10% fatal, yet they are no
doubt very effective at stopping an attacker. While it may seem weird to
imagine a pacifist shooting someone in the stomach, when the chance of
survival is 90%, it does not seem unreasonable to say that the pacifist could
be aiming to stop the attacker non-lethally. After all, tasers sometimes kill,
too. They do so less than 0.25% of the time, but that’s a difference of degree
rather than of principle.

First, we have “officially” non-lethal weapons: tasers, gas, etc. Some of
these might violate current international law, but it seems that a pacifist
country could modify its commitment to some accords.

One should never murder anyone. Killing, on the other hand, can sometimes be
justified.  
  
One question about killing the leader of an invading country is whether the
leader counts as a civilian, since the killing of civilians is forbidden by
the Geneva Convention. There is also some worry about the Geneva Convention's
killing by "perfidy", which is taken to rule out at least some assassinations.
So, as a matter of positive international law, it seems a difficult question.  
  
Were there no international law on the matter, I wouldn't see a significant
difference between killing a political leader and killing a general, if both
are giving orders to fight. Morally speaking, but not necessarily in
international law, both seem to me to be equally combatants.  
  
Besides the moral and legal questions, there is also a prudential question. In
my post I assumed that killing the general would stop the invasion. I got to
assume that because I was making up the case. Whether in actual fact killing a
leader would stop an invasion is less clear. Indeed such a thing might be seen
as such a serious attack on the country that the retaliation might be really
horrific.

Very well. Now consider this on a national level. Suppose there are a million
enemy soldiers ordered to commit genocide against ten million, and you have
two ways to stop them:

These may seem to be consequentialist arguments. I don't think so. I don't
have the same intuitions if we replace the general by the general's innocent
child in (2) and (4), even if killing the child were to stop the war (e.g., by
making the general afraid that their other children would be murdered).

Note that a version of this argument goes through even if the moderate
pacifist backs up and says that tasers are too lethal. For suppose instead of
tasers we have drones that destroy the dominant hand of an enemy soldier while
guaranteeing survival (with science fictional medical technology). It’s
clearly right to release such a drone on a soldier who is about to kill ten
innocents. But now compare:

If you can tase one person to stop the murder of ten, then (1) should be
permissible if it’s the only option. But tasers occasionally kill people. We
don’t know how often. Apparently it’s [less than 1 in
400](https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/investigations/2021/04/23/police-
use-tasers-ends-hundreds-deaths-like-daunte-wright/7221153002/) uses. Suppose
it’s 1 in 4000. Then option (1) results in 250 enemy deaths.

I think (4) is still morally preferable to causing the kind of disruption to
the lives of a million people that plan (3) would involve.

Alex  
  
Doesn't you post here entail that we should murder Putin?

Now, imagine that one person is attacking you and nine other innocents, with
the intent of killing the ten of you, and you can stop them with a taser.
Surely you should, and surely the moderate pacifist will say that this is an
appropriate use case for the taser.

Imagine a moderate pacifist who rejects lethal self-defense, but allows non-
lethal self-defense when appropriate, say by use of tasers.

So maybe our choice is between tasing a million, thereby non-intentionally
killing 250 soldiers, and intentionally killing one general. It seems to me
that (2) is morally preferable, even though our moderate pacifist has to allow
(1) and forbid (2).

Alex  
  
Of course one should never murder anyone, but the question is: would killing
Putin be murder?

I think the difficulty with a causal model is the fact that in paradigm cases
of normative power, there is a natural power that _is_ being exercised, and we
have the intuition that the exercise of the natural power is necessary and
sufficient for the normative effect. But on a causal model, why couldn’t I
cause a promissory-type obligation without promising, simply causing the
relevant property of being obligated to come to be instantiated in me? And why
couldn’t I engage in the speech act while yet remaining normatively unbound,
because my normative power wasn’t exercised in parallel with the natural
power?

There are two versions of the above model. On one version, there is an
underlying fundamental conditional normative fact _C_ , such as that if I have
promised something then I should do it, and my exercise of normative power
supplies the antecedent _A_ of that conditional, and then the normative
consequent of _C_ comes to be grounded in _C_ and _A_. On another version,
there there are some natural acts that are directly constitutive of a
normative state of affairs, not merely by supplying the antecedent of a
conditional normative fact. I think the first version of the model is the more
plausible in paradigmatic cases.

But why not allow for a causal model? Why not suppose that a normative power
is a causal power to make an irreducible normative property come to be
instantiated in someone? Thus, my power to promise is the power to cause
myself to be obligated to do what I have promised.

Perhaps the real problem for a lot of people with a causal view of normative
powers is that it tends to lead to a violation of supervenience. For if it is
metaphysically possble to have the exercise of the normative power without the
exercise of the natural power, or vice versa, then it seems we don’t have
supervenience of the normative on the non-normative. But supervenience does
not seem to me to be inescapable.

Here is a picture on which this is correct. We exercise a normative power by
exercising a natural power in such a context that the successful exercise of
the natural power is partly constitutive of a normative fact. For instance, we
utter a promise, thereby exercising a natural power to engage in a certain
kind of speech act, and our exercise of that speech act is partly constitutive
of, rather than causal of, the state of affairs of our being obligated to
carry out the promised action.

A normative power is a power to change a normative condition.
[Raz](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/230182259.pdf) says the change is not
produced “causally” but “normatively”.

Maybe the answer to both questions is that I could, but only metaphysically
and not causally. In other words, it could be that the laws of nature, or of
human nature, make it impossible for me to exercise one of the powers without
the other, just as I cannot wiggle my ring finger without wiggling my middle
finger as well. On this view, if there is a God, he could cause me to acquire
promissory-type obligations without my promising, and he could let me engage
in the natural act of promising while blocking the exercise of normative power
and leaving me normatively unbound. This doesn’t seem particularly
problematic.

For the strong version to have any plausibility, “good” must include cases of
purely instrumental goodness.

According to the guise of the good thesis, one always acts for the sake of an
apparent good. There is a weaker and a stronger version of this:

**Strong** : Whenever you act, you act for an end, and every end you act for
you perceive as good.

**Weak** : Whenever you act, you act for an end that you perceive is good.

But perhaps we can say this. We have a normative power to endow some neutral
things with value by making them our ends. And in fact the only way to act for
an end that does not have any independent value is by exercising that
normative power. And exercising that normative power involves your seeing the
thing you’re endowing with value as valuable. And maybe the only way to raise
your arm or for Bob to bake the cake in the examples is by exercising the
normative power, and doing so involves seeing the end as good. Maybe. This has
some phenomenological plausibility and it would be nice if it were true,
because the strong guise of the good thesis is pretty plausible to me.

I think there is still reason to be sceptical of the strong version.

In both cases, it is still true that the agent acts for a good end—the useful
triggering of the device and the production of the cake. But in both cases it
seems they are also acting for a worthless end. Thus the cases seem to fit
with the weak but not the strong guise of the good thesis.

I was going to leave it at this. But then I thought of a way to save the
strong guise of the good thesis. Success is valuable as such. When I try to do
something, succeeding at it has value. So the arm going up or the cake being
produced _are_ valuable as necessary parts of the success of one’s action. So
perhaps every end of your action _is_ trivially good, because it is good for
your action to succeed, and the end is a (constitutive, not causal) means to
success.

**Case 1:** There is some device which does something useful when you trigger
it. It is triggered by electrical activity. You strap it on to your arm, and
raise your arm, so that the electrical activity in your muscles triggers the
device. Your raising your arm has the arm going up as an end, but that end is
not perceived as good, but merely neutral. All you care about is the
electrical activity in your muscles.

This isn’t quite enough for a defense of the strong thesis. For even if the
success is good, it does not follow that you perceive the success as good. You
might subscribe to an axiological theory on which success is not good in
general, but only success at something good.

**Case 2:** Back when they were dating in high school, Bob promised to try his
best to bake a nine-layer chocolate cake for Alice’s 40th birthday. Since
then, Bob and Alice have had a falling out, and hate each other’s guts.
Moreover, Alice and all her guests hate chocolate. But Alice doesn’t release
Bob from his promise. Bob tries his best to bake the cake in order to fulfill
his promise, and happens to succeed. In trying to bake the cake, Bob acted for
the end of producing a cake. But producing the cake was worthless, since no
one would eat it. The only value was in the trying, since that was the
fulfillment of his promise.

I climbed in sets of 10. The planned pace was 8:18 per set and a 44-45 second
rest between sets (clock runs during rests,), averaging at 49.8 seconds per
climb including descent. I was always ahead of pace, and I occasionally took a
mini break at the mid-point time if I was too far ahead.

Most of my practice was with an auto-belay, and at a shorter distance per
climb (and hence greater number of climbs needed) since the auto-belay makes
it impossible to get to the top of the wall. The auto-belay is also spring
loaded so it effectively decreases body weight (by 7 lbs at the bottom
according to my measurement). Then a couple of weeks ago the auto-belay was
closed by management due to a maintenance issue, and I had a break in training
until the Wednesday before the official attempt when I trained with a manual
belay.

And now for something not very philosophical. Today, in front of two witnesses
and two timekeepers and with the help of Levi Durham doing an amazing feat of
belaying me for an hour, I beat the [Guinness World
Record](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/438677-greatest-
vertical-distance-climbed-on-an-artificial-climbing-wall-in-1-hour-indi) in
greatest vertical distance climbed in one hour on an indoor climbing wall. The
previous record was 928.5m and I did 1013.7m (with about half a minute to
spare). On Baylor's climbing wall, this involved 67 climbs divided into sets
of 10 (the last was 7), with about a minute of rest between sets (the clock
kept on running during the rest).

On the ground there was a sheet of paper with the start and end times of each
break printed in large letters (calculated by [this
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/10e364904dfcc19b043a594232e0acde)), as
well as the mid-point time for each set of 10 to keep me better on pace.

The top of the wall is 15.13 meters vertically from the ground (as measured by
a geology grad student), at 3.5 degree slab.

I wore moderately worn (one small hole) and comfortable 5.10 Anasazi shoes, a
Camp USA Energy harness, shorts and a T-shirt. (I have not received any
sponsorship.) My belayer used a tube-style device and wore belay gloves.

You should make a living out of that, Alex.  
Would give you a lot less stress.

About half-way through, I ducked into the storage area inside the rock and
changed to a dry shirt.

I was actually really stressed yesterday. I had already beaten the record
unofficially in practice, but with lots of people coming to watch (local
climbers, grad students and colleagues), I didn't want to disappoint.
Contributing to the stress was that the conditions changed from my practice
runs (the auto-belay was down from maintenance and I had to use a manual
belay; this involved lengthening the route slightly, increasing the length of
each set and decreasing the total count, as well as an effective increase in
my weight since the auto-belay subtracts a few pounds due to its spring-
loading), and that I hadn't been able to train on the particular route for
several weeks prior to Wednesday due to the auto-belay being down for
maintenance while on Wednesday's approximately half-distance-at-half-time
practice I was more tired at the end than I should have been due to poor
pacing.

Since Guinness requires video proof in addition to human witnesses, in the
interests of redundancy, I had three cameras pointed at the attempt. The best
footage (above) is from a Sony A7R2 with a zoom lens at 16mm, producing 1080P
at 59.94 fps. Video was processed with Adobe Premiere Rush. The processing
consisted of trimming the start and end, and adding a timing video track I
generated with a [Python OpenCV2
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/3a705c859d4ea4a482c4e47e96a08f79),
synchronized with single-frame precision at the 1:00:00 point with the footage
of Giant Stopwatch (barely visible under the table towards the end of the
video; early in the video, glare hides it). For the unofficial version I link
above, I accelerated the middle climbs 10X in Premiere Rush.

The route was a standard 5.7 grade for most of my training (including when I
unofficially beat the records), with Rock management kindly agreeing to keep
the route up for several months for me. For the final attempt, we added holds
to make the finish at the top of the wall, and changed three other holds to
easier ones. (Guinness has no route grade requirements.)

In the morning I stress-baked pumpkin muffins for myself and the volunteers. I
had the muffins, water and loose chalk on a table for use during breaks.

A Kindle Fire running a pre-release version of my [Giant
Stopwatch](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=omegacentauri.mobi.simplestopwatch&hl=en_US&gl=US)
app provided unofficial timing for audience to see and for my pacing. I had to
modify the app to have a periodic beep to meet Guinness's requirements of an
audible stop signal.

I trained for about three months, not very heavily. In training did two
unofficial full-length practice runs, and in each I beat the previous record:
in the first one I got 947.1 meters and in the second I got 1004.5, so I was
pretty confident I could beat the 928.5 meters on the official attempt (though
I was still pretty nervous). I also trained by doing a small number of
approximately 1/2 or 1/3 sized practices (maybe three or so), and more regular
shorter runs (1-10 climbs) at fast pace.

Whether such a limited way of waging war could be successful probably depends
on the case. If one combined the non-lethal (or not intentionally lethal)
means with technological and numerical superiority, it wouldn’t be surprising
to me if one could win.

Second, “lethal” weapons can be used less than lethally. For instance, with
modern medicine, abdominal gunshot wounds are only 10% fatal, yet they are no
doubt very effective at stopping an attacker. While it may seem weird to
imagine a pacifist shooting someone in the stomach, when the chance of
survival is 90%, it does not seem unreasonable to say that the pacifist could
be aiming to stop the attacker non-lethally. After all, tasers sometimes kill,
too. They do so less than 0.25% of the time, but that’s a difference of degree
rather than of principle.

Third, we might subdivide moderate pacifists based on whether they prohibit
all violence that foreseeably leads to death or just violence that
intentionally leads to death. If it is only intentionally lethal violence that
is forbidden, then quite a bit of modern warfare can stand. If the enemy is
attacking with tanks or planes, one can intentionally destroy the tank or
plane as a weapon, while only foreseeing, without intending, the death of the
crew. (I don’t know how far one can take this line without sophistry. Can one
drop a bomb on an infantry unit intending to smash up their rifles without
intending to kill the soldiers?) Similarly, one can bomb enemy weapons
factories.

I’ve been wondering whether it is possible for a country to count as pacifist
and yet wage a defensive war. I think the answer is positive, as long as one
has a moderate pacifism that is opposed to lethal violence but not to all
violence. I think that a prohibition of all violence is untenable. It seems
obvious that if you see someone about to shoot an innocent person, and you can
give the shooter a shove to make them miss, you presumptively should.

First, we have “officially” non-lethal weapons: tasers, gas, etc. Some of
these might violate current international law, but it seems that a pacifist
country could modify its commitment to some accords.

These may seem to be consequentialist arguments. I don't think so. I don't
have the same intuitions if we replace the general by the general's innocent
child in (2) and (4), even if killing the child were to stop the war (e.g., by
making the general afraid that their other children would be murdered).

Alex  
  
Doesn't you post here entail that we should murder Putin?

Imagine a moderate pacifist who rejects lethal self-defense, but allows non-
lethal self-defense when appropriate, say by use of tasers.

I think (4) is still morally preferable to causing the kind of disruption to
the lives of a million people that plan (3) would involve.

So maybe our choice is between tasing a million, thereby non-intentionally
killing 250 soldiers, and intentionally killing one general. It seems to me
that (2) is morally preferable, even though our moderate pacifist has to allow
(1) and forbid (2).

Very well. Now consider this on a national level. Suppose there are a million
enemy soldiers ordered to commit genocide against ten million, and you have
two ways to stop them:

Alex  
  
Of course one should never murder anyone, but the question is: would killing
Putin be murder?

Note that a version of this argument goes through even if the moderate
pacifist backs up and says that tasers are too lethal. For suppose instead of
tasers we have drones that destroy the dominant hand of an enemy soldier while
guaranteeing survival (with science fictional medical technology). It’s
clearly right to release such a drone on a soldier who is about to kill ten
innocents. But now compare:

Now, imagine that one person is attacking you and nine other innocents, with
the intent of killing the ten of you, and you can stop them with a taser.
Surely you should, and surely the moderate pacifist will say that this is an
appropriate use case for the taser.

One should never murder anyone. Killing, on the other hand, can sometimes be
justified.  
  
One question about killing the leader of an invading country is whether the
leader counts as a civilian, since the killing of civilians is forbidden by
the Geneva Convention. There is also some worry about the Geneva Convention's
killing by "perfidy", which is taken to rule out at least some assassinations.
So, as a matter of positive international law, it seems a difficult question.  
  
Were there no international law on the matter, I wouldn't see a significant
difference between killing a political leader and killing a general, if both
are giving orders to fight. Morally speaking, but not necessarily in
international law, both seem to me to be equally combatants.  
  
Besides the moral and legal questions, there is also a prudential question. In
my post I assumed that killing the general would stop the invasion. I got to
assume that because I was making up the case. Whether in actual fact killing a
leader would stop an invasion is less clear. Indeed such a thing might be seen
as such a serious attack on the country that the retaliation might be really
horrific.

If you can tase one person to stop the murder of ten, then (1) should be
permissible if it’s the only option. But tasers occasionally kill people. We
don’t know how often. Apparently it’s [less than 1 in
400](https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/investigations/2021/04/23/police-
use-tasers-ends-hundreds-deaths-like-daunte-wright/7221153002/) uses. Suppose
it’s 1 in 4000. Then option (1) results in 250 enemy deaths.

On the ground there was a sheet of paper with the start and end times of each
break printed in large letters (calculated by [this
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/10e364904dfcc19b043a594232e0acde)), as
well as the mid-point time for each set of 10 to keep me better on pace.

Since Guinness requires video proof in addition to human witnesses, in the
interests of redundancy, I had three cameras pointed at the attempt. The best
footage (above) is from a Sony A7R2 with a zoom lens at 16mm, producing 1080P
at 59.94 fps. Video was processed with Adobe Premiere Rush. The processing
consisted of trimming the start and end, and adding a timing video track I
generated with a [Python OpenCV2
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/3a705c859d4ea4a482c4e47e96a08f79),
synchronized with single-frame precision at the 1:00:00 point with the footage
of Giant Stopwatch (barely visible under the table towards the end of the
video; early in the video, glare hides it). For the unofficial version I link
above, I accelerated the middle climbs 10X in Premiere Rush.

I climbed in sets of 10. The planned pace was 8:18 per set and a 44-45 second
rest between sets (clock runs during rests,), averaging at 49.8 seconds per
climb including descent. I was always ahead of pace, and I occasionally took a
mini break at the mid-point time if I was too far ahead.

About half-way through, I ducked into the storage area inside the rock and
changed to a dry shirt.

A Kindle Fire running a pre-release version of my [Giant
Stopwatch](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=omegacentauri.mobi.simplestopwatch&hl=en_US&gl=US)
app provided unofficial timing for audience to see and for my pacing. I had to
modify the app to have a periodic beep to meet Guinness's requirements of an
audible stop signal.

In the morning I stress-baked pumpkin muffins for myself and the volunteers. I
had the muffins, water and loose chalk on a table for use during breaks.

And now for something not very philosophical. Today, in front of two witnesses
and two timekeepers and with the help of Levi Durham doing an amazing feat of
belaying me for an hour, I beat the [Guinness World
Record](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/438677-greatest-
vertical-distance-climbed-on-an-artificial-climbing-wall-in-1-hour-indi) in
greatest vertical distance climbed in one hour on an indoor climbing wall. The
previous record was 928.5m and I did 1013.7m (with about half a minute to
spare). On Baylor's climbing wall, this involved 67 climbs divided into sets
of 10 (the last was 7), with about a minute of rest between sets (the clock
kept on running during the rest).

Most of my practice was with an auto-belay, and at a shorter distance per
climb (and hence greater number of climbs needed) since the auto-belay makes
it impossible to get to the top of the wall. The auto-belay is also spring
loaded so it effectively decreases body weight (by 7 lbs at the bottom
according to my measurement). Then a couple of weeks ago the auto-belay was
closed by management due to a maintenance issue, and I had a break in training
until the Wednesday before the official attempt when I trained with a manual
belay.

I was actually really stressed yesterday. I had already beaten the record
unofficially in practice, but with lots of people coming to watch (local
climbers, grad students and colleagues), I didn't want to disappoint.
Contributing to the stress was that the conditions changed from my practice
runs (the auto-belay was down from maintenance and I had to use a manual
belay; this involved lengthening the route slightly, increasing the length of
each set and decreasing the total count, as well as an effective increase in
my weight since the auto-belay subtracts a few pounds due to its spring-
loading), and that I hadn't been able to train on the particular route for
several weeks prior to Wednesday due to the auto-belay being down for
maintenance while on Wednesday's approximately half-distance-at-half-time
practice I was more tired at the end than I should have been due to poor
pacing.

The top of the wall is 15.13 meters vertically from the ground (as measured by
a geology grad student), at 3.5 degree slab.

You should make a living out of that, Alex.  
Would give you a lot less stress.

I trained for about three months, not very heavily. In training did two
unofficial full-length practice runs, and in each I beat the previous record:
in the first one I got 947.1 meters and in the second I got 1004.5, so I was
pretty confident I could beat the 928.5 meters on the official attempt (though
I was still pretty nervous). I also trained by doing a small number of
approximately 1/2 or 1/3 sized practices (maybe three or so), and more regular
shorter runs (1-10 climbs) at fast pace.

The route was a standard 5.7 grade for most of my training (including when I
unofficially beat the records), with Rock management kindly agreeing to keep
the route up for several months for me. For the final attempt, we added holds
to make the finish at the top of the wall, and changed three other holds to
easier ones. (Guinness has no route grade requirements.)

I wore moderately worn (one small hole) and comfortable 5.10 Anasazi shoes, a
Camp USA Energy harness, shorts and a T-shirt. (I have not received any
sponsorship.) My belayer used a tube-style device and wore belay gloves.

First, we have “officially” non-lethal weapons: tasers, gas, etc. Some of
these might violate current international law, but it seems that a pacifist
country could modify its commitment to some accords.

Second, “lethal” weapons can be used less than lethally. For instance, with
modern medicine, abdominal gunshot wounds are only 10% fatal, yet they are no
doubt very effective at stopping an attacker. While it may seem weird to
imagine a pacifist shooting someone in the stomach, when the chance of
survival is 90%, it does not seem unreasonable to say that the pacifist could
be aiming to stop the attacker non-lethally. After all, tasers sometimes kill,
too. They do so less than 0.25% of the time, but that’s a difference of degree
rather than of principle.

Third, we might subdivide moderate pacifists based on whether they prohibit
all violence that foreseeably leads to death or just violence that
intentionally leads to death. If it is only intentionally lethal violence that
is forbidden, then quite a bit of modern warfare can stand. If the enemy is
attacking with tanks or planes, one can intentionally destroy the tank or
plane as a weapon, while only foreseeing, without intending, the death of the
crew. (I don’t know how far one can take this line without sophistry. Can one
drop a bomb on an infantry unit intending to smash up their rifles without
intending to kill the soldiers?) Similarly, one can bomb enemy weapons
factories.

I’ve been wondering whether it is possible for a country to count as pacifist
and yet wage a defensive war. I think the answer is positive, as long as one
has a moderate pacifism that is opposed to lethal violence but not to all
violence. I think that a prohibition of all violence is untenable. It seems
obvious that if you see someone about to shoot an innocent person, and you can
give the shooter a shove to make them miss, you presumptively should.

Whether such a limited way of waging war could be successful probably depends
on the case. If one combined the non-lethal (or not intentionally lethal)
means with technological and numerical superiority, it wouldn’t be surprising
to me if one could win.

Very well. Now consider this on a national level. Suppose there are a million
enemy soldiers ordered to commit genocide against ten million, and you have
two ways to stop them:

So maybe our choice is between tasing a million, thereby non-intentionally
killing 250 soldiers, and intentionally killing one general. It seems to me
that (2) is morally preferable, even though our moderate pacifist has to allow
(1) and forbid (2).

Note that a version of this argument goes through even if the moderate
pacifist backs up and says that tasers are too lethal. For suppose instead of
tasers we have drones that destroy the dominant hand of an enemy soldier while
guaranteeing survival (with science fictional medical technology). It’s
clearly right to release such a drone on a soldier who is about to kill ten
innocents. But now compare:

I think (4) is still morally preferable to causing the kind of disruption to
the lives of a million people that plan (3) would involve.

Now, imagine that one person is attacking you and nine other innocents, with
the intent of killing the ten of you, and you can stop them with a taser.
Surely you should, and surely the moderate pacifist will say that this is an
appropriate use case for the taser.

If you can tase one person to stop the murder of ten, then (1) should be
permissible if it’s the only option. But tasers occasionally kill people. We
don’t know how often. Apparently it’s [less than 1 in
400](https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/investigations/2021/04/23/police-
use-tasers-ends-hundreds-deaths-like-daunte-wright/7221153002/) uses. Suppose
it’s 1 in 4000. Then option (1) results in 250 enemy deaths.

These may seem to be consequentialist arguments. I don't think so. I don't
have the same intuitions if we replace the general by the general's innocent
child in (2) and (4), even if killing the child were to stop the war (e.g., by
making the general afraid that their other children would be murdered).

Alex  
  
Doesn't you post here entail that we should murder Putin?

Imagine a moderate pacifist who rejects lethal self-defense, but allows non-
lethal self-defense when appropriate, say by use of tasers.

One should never murder anyone. Killing, on the other hand, can sometimes be
justified.  
  
One question about killing the leader of an invading country is whether the
leader counts as a civilian, since the killing of civilians is forbidden by
the Geneva Convention. There is also some worry about the Geneva Convention's
killing by "perfidy", which is taken to rule out at least some assassinations.
So, as a matter of positive international law, it seems a difficult question.  
  
Were there no international law on the matter, I wouldn't see a significant
difference between killing a political leader and killing a general, if both
are giving orders to fight. Morally speaking, but not necessarily in
international law, both seem to me to be equally combatants.  
  
Besides the moral and legal questions, there is also a prudential question. In
my post I assumed that killing the general would stop the invasion. I got to
assume that because I was making up the case. Whether in actual fact killing a
leader would stop an invasion is less clear. Indeed such a thing might be seen
as such a serious attack on the country that the retaliation might be really
horrific.

Alex  
  
Of course one should never murder anyone, but the question is: would killing
Putin be murder?

I think the difficulty with a causal model is the fact that in paradigm cases
of normative power, there is a natural power that _is_ being exercised, and we
have the intuition that the exercise of the natural power is necessary and
sufficient for the normative effect. But on a causal model, why couldn’t I
cause a promissory-type obligation without promising, simply causing the
relevant property of being obligated to come to be instantiated in me? And why
couldn’t I engage in the speech act while yet remaining normatively unbound,
because my normative power wasn’t exercised in parallel with the natural
power?

Here is a picture on which this is correct. We exercise a normative power by
exercising a natural power in such a context that the successful exercise of
the natural power is partly constitutive of a normative fact. For instance, we
utter a promise, thereby exercising a natural power to engage in a certain
kind of speech act, and our exercise of that speech act is partly constitutive
of, rather than causal of, the state of affairs of our being obligated to
carry out the promised action.

A normative power is a power to change a normative condition.
[Raz](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/230182259.pdf) says the change is not
produced “causally” but “normatively”.

There are two versions of the above model. On one version, there is an
underlying fundamental conditional normative fact _C_ , such as that if I have
promised something then I should do it, and my exercise of normative power
supplies the antecedent _A_ of that conditional, and then the normative
consequent of _C_ comes to be grounded in _C_ and _A_. On another version,
there there are some natural acts that are directly constitutive of a
normative state of affairs, not merely by supplying the antecedent of a
conditional normative fact. I think the first version of the model is the more
plausible in paradigmatic cases.

But why not allow for a causal model? Why not suppose that a normative power
is a causal power to make an irreducible normative property come to be
instantiated in someone? Thus, my power to promise is the power to cause
myself to be obligated to do what I have promised.

Perhaps the real problem for a lot of people with a causal view of normative
powers is that it tends to lead to a violation of supervenience. For if it is
metaphysically possble to have the exercise of the normative power without the
exercise of the natural power, or vice versa, then it seems we don’t have
supervenience of the normative on the non-normative. But supervenience does
not seem to me to be inescapable.

Maybe the answer to both questions is that I could, but only metaphysically
and not causally. In other words, it could be that the laws of nature, or of
human nature, make it impossible for me to exercise one of the powers without
the other, just as I cannot wiggle my ring finger without wiggling my middle
finger as well. On this view, if there is a God, he could cause me to acquire
promissory-type obligations without my promising, and he could let me engage
in the natural act of promising while blocking the exercise of normative power
and leaving me normatively unbound. This doesn’t seem particularly
problematic.

**Weak** : Whenever you act, you act for an end that you perceive is good.

But perhaps we can say this. We have a normative power to endow some neutral
things with value by making them our ends. And in fact the only way to act for
an end that does not have any independent value is by exercising that
normative power. And exercising that normative power involves your seeing the
thing you’re endowing with value as valuable. And maybe the only way to raise
your arm or for Bob to bake the cake in the examples is by exercising the
normative power, and doing so involves seeing the end as good. Maybe. This has
some phenomenological plausibility and it would be nice if it were true,
because the strong guise of the good thesis is pretty plausible to me.

**Case 1:** There is some device which does something useful when you trigger
it. It is triggered by electrical activity. You strap it on to your arm, and
raise your arm, so that the electrical activity in your muscles triggers the
device. Your raising your arm has the arm going up as an end, but that end is
not perceived as good, but merely neutral. All you care about is the
electrical activity in your muscles.

I was going to leave it at this. But then I thought of a way to save the
strong guise of the good thesis. Success is valuable as such. When I try to do
something, succeeding at it has value. So the arm going up or the cake being
produced _are_ valuable as necessary parts of the success of one’s action. So
perhaps every end of your action _is_ trivially good, because it is good for
your action to succeed, and the end is a (constitutive, not causal) means to
success.

According to the guise of the good thesis, one always acts for the sake of an
apparent good. There is a weaker and a stronger version of this:

This isn’t quite enough for a defense of the strong thesis. For even if the
success is good, it does not follow that you perceive the success as good. You
might subscribe to an axiological theory on which success is not good in
general, but only success at something good.

I think there is still reason to be sceptical of the strong version.

**Strong** : Whenever you act, you act for an end, and every end you act for
you perceive as good.

For the strong version to have any plausibility, “good” must include cases of
purely instrumental goodness.

**Case 2:** Back when they were dating in high school, Bob promised to try his
best to bake a nine-layer chocolate cake for Alice’s 40th birthday. Since
then, Bob and Alice have had a falling out, and hate each other’s guts.
Moreover, Alice and all her guests hate chocolate. But Alice doesn’t release
Bob from his promise. Bob tries his best to bake the cake in order to fulfill
his promise, and happens to succeed. In trying to bake the cake, Bob acted for
the end of producing a cake. But producing the cake was worthless, since no
one would eat it. The only value was in the trying, since that was the
fulfillment of his promise.

In both cases, it is still true that the agent acts for a good end—the useful
triggering of the device and the production of the cake. But in both cases it
seems they are also acting for a worthless end. Thus the cases seem to fit
with the weak but not the strong guise of the good thesis.

Since Guinness requires video proof in addition to human witnesses, in the
interests of redundancy, I had three cameras pointed at the attempt. The best
footage (above) is from a Sony A7R2 with a zoom lens at 16mm, producing 1080P
at 59.94 fps. Video was processed with Adobe Premiere Rush. The processing
consisted of trimming the start and end, and adding a timing video track I
generated with a [Python OpenCV2
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/3a705c859d4ea4a482c4e47e96a08f79),
synchronized with single-frame precision at the 1:00:00 point with the footage
of Giant Stopwatch (barely visible under the table towards the end of the
video; early in the video, glare hides it). For the unofficial version I link
above, I accelerated the middle climbs 10X in Premiere Rush.

About half-way through, I ducked into the storage area inside the rock and
changed to a dry shirt.

The route was a standard 5.7 grade for most of my training (including when I
unofficially beat the records), with Rock management kindly agreeing to keep
the route up for several months for me. For the final attempt, we added holds
to make the finish at the top of the wall, and changed three other holds to
easier ones. (Guinness has no route grade requirements.)

I wore moderately worn (one small hole) and comfortable 5.10 Anasazi shoes, a
Camp USA Energy harness, shorts and a T-shirt. (I have not received any
sponsorship.) My belayer used a tube-style device and wore belay gloves.

You should make a living out of that, Alex.  
Would give you a lot less stress.

And now for something not very philosophical. Today, in front of two witnesses
and two timekeepers and with the help of Levi Durham doing an amazing feat of
belaying me for an hour, I beat the [Guinness World
Record](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/438677-greatest-
vertical-distance-climbed-on-an-artificial-climbing-wall-in-1-hour-indi) in
greatest vertical distance climbed in one hour on an indoor climbing wall. The
previous record was 928.5m and I did 1013.7m (with about half a minute to
spare). On Baylor's climbing wall, this involved 67 climbs divided into sets
of 10 (the last was 7), with about a minute of rest between sets (the clock
kept on running during the rest).

I was actually really stressed yesterday. I had already beaten the record
unofficially in practice, but with lots of people coming to watch (local
climbers, grad students and colleagues), I didn't want to disappoint.
Contributing to the stress was that the conditions changed from my practice
runs (the auto-belay was down from maintenance and I had to use a manual
belay; this involved lengthening the route slightly, increasing the length of
each set and decreasing the total count, as well as an effective increase in
my weight since the auto-belay subtracts a few pounds due to its spring-
loading), and that I hadn't been able to train on the particular route for
several weeks prior to Wednesday due to the auto-belay being down for
maintenance while on Wednesday's approximately half-distance-at-half-time
practice I was more tired at the end than I should have been due to poor
pacing.

Most of my practice was with an auto-belay, and at a shorter distance per
climb (and hence greater number of climbs needed) since the auto-belay makes
it impossible to get to the top of the wall. The auto-belay is also spring
loaded so it effectively decreases body weight (by 7 lbs at the bottom
according to my measurement). Then a couple of weeks ago the auto-belay was
closed by management due to a maintenance issue, and I had a break in training
until the Wednesday before the official attempt when I trained with a manual
belay.

I trained for about three months, not very heavily. In training did two
unofficial full-length practice runs, and in each I beat the previous record:
in the first one I got 947.1 meters and in the second I got 1004.5, so I was
pretty confident I could beat the 928.5 meters on the official attempt (though
I was still pretty nervous). I also trained by doing a small number of
approximately 1/2 or 1/3 sized practices (maybe three or so), and more regular
shorter runs (1-10 climbs) at fast pace.

A Kindle Fire running a pre-release version of my [Giant
Stopwatch](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=omegacentauri.mobi.simplestopwatch&hl=en_US&gl=US)
app provided unofficial timing for audience to see and for my pacing. I had to
modify the app to have a periodic beep to meet Guinness's requirements of an
audible stop signal.

In the morning I stress-baked pumpkin muffins for myself and the volunteers. I
had the muffins, water and loose chalk on a table for use during breaks.

On the ground there was a sheet of paper with the start and end times of each
break printed in large letters (calculated by [this
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/10e364904dfcc19b043a594232e0acde)), as
well as the mid-point time for each set of 10 to keep me better on pace.

The top of the wall is 15.13 meters vertically from the ground (as measured by
a geology grad student), at 3.5 degree slab.

I climbed in sets of 10. The planned pace was 8:18 per set and a 44-45 second
rest between sets (clock runs during rests,), averaging at 49.8 seconds per
climb including descent. I was always ahead of pace, and I occasionally took a
mini break at the mid-point time if I was too far ahead.

I’ve been wondering whether it is possible for a country to count as pacifist
and yet wage a defensive war. I think the answer is positive, as long as one
has a moderate pacifism that is opposed to lethal violence but not to all
violence. I think that a prohibition of all violence is untenable. It seems
obvious that if you see someone about to shoot an innocent person, and you can
give the shooter a shove to make them miss, you presumptively should.

Third, we might subdivide moderate pacifists based on whether they prohibit
all violence that foreseeably leads to death or just violence that
intentionally leads to death. If it is only intentionally lethal violence that
is forbidden, then quite a bit of modern warfare can stand. If the enemy is
attacking with tanks or planes, one can intentionally destroy the tank or
plane as a weapon, while only foreseeing, without intending, the death of the
crew. (I don’t know how far one can take this line without sophistry. Can one
drop a bomb on an infantry unit intending to smash up their rifles without
intending to kill the soldiers?) Similarly, one can bomb enemy weapons
factories.

First, we have “officially” non-lethal weapons: tasers, gas, etc. Some of
these might violate current international law, but it seems that a pacifist
country could modify its commitment to some accords.

Whether such a limited way of waging war could be successful probably depends
on the case. If one combined the non-lethal (or not intentionally lethal)
means with technological and numerical superiority, it wouldn’t be surprising
to me if one could win.

Second, “lethal” weapons can be used less than lethally. For instance, with
modern medicine, abdominal gunshot wounds are only 10% fatal, yet they are no
doubt very effective at stopping an attacker. While it may seem weird to
imagine a pacifist shooting someone in the stomach, when the chance of
survival is 90%, it does not seem unreasonable to say that the pacifist could
be aiming to stop the attacker non-lethally. After all, tasers sometimes kill,
too. They do so less than 0.25% of the time, but that’s a difference of degree
rather than of principle.

I think (4) is still morally preferable to causing the kind of disruption to
the lives of a million people that plan (3) would involve.

Now, imagine that one person is attacking you and nine other innocents, with
the intent of killing the ten of you, and you can stop them with a taser.
Surely you should, and surely the moderate pacifist will say that this is an
appropriate use case for the taser.

Alex  
  
Doesn't you post here entail that we should murder Putin?

Note that a version of this argument goes through even if the moderate
pacifist backs up and says that tasers are too lethal. For suppose instead of
tasers we have drones that destroy the dominant hand of an enemy soldier while
guaranteeing survival (with science fictional medical technology). It’s
clearly right to release such a drone on a soldier who is about to kill ten
innocents. But now compare:

Very well. Now consider this on a national level. Suppose there are a million
enemy soldiers ordered to commit genocide against ten million, and you have
two ways to stop them:

One should never murder anyone. Killing, on the other hand, can sometimes be
justified.  
  
One question about killing the leader of an invading country is whether the
leader counts as a civilian, since the killing of civilians is forbidden by
the Geneva Convention. There is also some worry about the Geneva Convention's
killing by "perfidy", which is taken to rule out at least some assassinations.
So, as a matter of positive international law, it seems a difficult question.  
  
Were there no international law on the matter, I wouldn't see a significant
difference between killing a political leader and killing a general, if both
are giving orders to fight. Morally speaking, but not necessarily in
international law, both seem to me to be equally combatants.  
  
Besides the moral and legal questions, there is also a prudential question. In
my post I assumed that killing the general would stop the invasion. I got to
assume that because I was making up the case. Whether in actual fact killing a
leader would stop an invasion is less clear. Indeed such a thing might be seen
as such a serious attack on the country that the retaliation might be really
horrific.

Imagine a moderate pacifist who rejects lethal self-defense, but allows non-
lethal self-defense when appropriate, say by use of tasers.

These may seem to be consequentialist arguments. I don't think so. I don't
have the same intuitions if we replace the general by the general's innocent
child in (2) and (4), even if killing the child were to stop the war (e.g., by
making the general afraid that their other children would be murdered).

So maybe our choice is between tasing a million, thereby non-intentionally
killing 250 soldiers, and intentionally killing one general. It seems to me
that (2) is morally preferable, even though our moderate pacifist has to allow
(1) and forbid (2).

If you can tase one person to stop the murder of ten, then (1) should be
permissible if it’s the only option. But tasers occasionally kill people. We
don’t know how often. Apparently it’s [less than 1 in
400](https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/investigations/2021/04/23/police-
use-tasers-ends-hundreds-deaths-like-daunte-wright/7221153002/) uses. Suppose
it’s 1 in 4000. Then option (1) results in 250 enemy deaths.

Alex  
  
Of course one should never murder anyone, but the question is: would killing
Putin be murder?

But why not allow for a causal model? Why not suppose that a normative power
is a causal power to make an irreducible normative property come to be
instantiated in someone? Thus, my power to promise is the power to cause
myself to be obligated to do what I have promised.

Perhaps the real problem for a lot of people with a causal view of normative
powers is that it tends to lead to a violation of supervenience. For if it is
metaphysically possble to have the exercise of the normative power without the
exercise of the natural power, or vice versa, then it seems we don’t have
supervenience of the normative on the non-normative. But supervenience does
not seem to me to be inescapable.

Maybe the answer to both questions is that I could, but only metaphysically
and not causally. In other words, it could be that the laws of nature, or of
human nature, make it impossible for me to exercise one of the powers without
the other, just as I cannot wiggle my ring finger without wiggling my middle
finger as well. On this view, if there is a God, he could cause me to acquire
promissory-type obligations without my promising, and he could let me engage
in the natural act of promising while blocking the exercise of normative power
and leaving me normatively unbound. This doesn’t seem particularly
problematic.

A normative power is a power to change a normative condition.
[Raz](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/230182259.pdf) says the change is not
produced “causally” but “normatively”.

I think the difficulty with a causal model is the fact that in paradigm cases
of normative power, there is a natural power that _is_ being exercised, and we
have the intuition that the exercise of the natural power is necessary and
sufficient for the normative effect. But on a causal model, why couldn’t I
cause a promissory-type obligation without promising, simply causing the
relevant property of being obligated to come to be instantiated in me? And why
couldn’t I engage in the speech act while yet remaining normatively unbound,
because my normative power wasn’t exercised in parallel with the natural
power?

Here is a picture on which this is correct. We exercise a normative power by
exercising a natural power in such a context that the successful exercise of
the natural power is partly constitutive of a normative fact. For instance, we
utter a promise, thereby exercising a natural power to engage in a certain
kind of speech act, and our exercise of that speech act is partly constitutive
of, rather than causal of, the state of affairs of our being obligated to
carry out the promised action.

There are two versions of the above model. On one version, there is an
underlying fundamental conditional normative fact _C_ , such as that if I have
promised something then I should do it, and my exercise of normative power
supplies the antecedent _A_ of that conditional, and then the normative
consequent of _C_ comes to be grounded in _C_ and _A_. On another version,
there there are some natural acts that are directly constitutive of a
normative state of affairs, not merely by supplying the antecedent of a
conditional normative fact. I think the first version of the model is the more
plausible in paradigmatic cases.

In both cases, it is still true that the agent acts for a good end—the useful
triggering of the device and the production of the cake. But in both cases it
seems they are also acting for a worthless end. Thus the cases seem to fit
with the weak but not the strong guise of the good thesis.

But perhaps we can say this. We have a normative power to endow some neutral
things with value by making them our ends. And in fact the only way to act for
an end that does not have any independent value is by exercising that
normative power. And exercising that normative power involves your seeing the
thing you’re endowing with value as valuable. And maybe the only way to raise
your arm or for Bob to bake the cake in the examples is by exercising the
normative power, and doing so involves seeing the end as good. Maybe. This has
some phenomenological plausibility and it would be nice if it were true,
because the strong guise of the good thesis is pretty plausible to me.

**Case 1:** There is some device which does something useful when you trigger
it. It is triggered by electrical activity. You strap it on to your arm, and
raise your arm, so that the electrical activity in your muscles triggers the
device. Your raising your arm has the arm going up as an end, but that end is
not perceived as good, but merely neutral. All you care about is the
electrical activity in your muscles.

This isn’t quite enough for a defense of the strong thesis. For even if the
success is good, it does not follow that you perceive the success as good. You
might subscribe to an axiological theory on which success is not good in
general, but only success at something good.

**Strong** : Whenever you act, you act for an end, and every end you act for
you perceive as good.

For the strong version to have any plausibility, “good” must include cases of
purely instrumental goodness.

**Weak** : Whenever you act, you act for an end that you perceive is good.

I think there is still reason to be sceptical of the strong version.

According to the guise of the good thesis, one always acts for the sake of an
apparent good. There is a weaker and a stronger version of this:

I was going to leave it at this. But then I thought of a way to save the
strong guise of the good thesis. Success is valuable as such. When I try to do
something, succeeding at it has value. So the arm going up or the cake being
produced _are_ valuable as necessary parts of the success of one’s action. So
perhaps every end of your action _is_ trivially good, because it is good for
your action to succeed, and the end is a (constitutive, not causal) means to
success.

**Case 2:** Back when they were dating in high school, Bob promised to try his
best to bake a nine-layer chocolate cake for Alice’s 40th birthday. Since
then, Bob and Alice have had a falling out, and hate each other’s guts.
Moreover, Alice and all her guests hate chocolate. But Alice doesn’t release
Bob from his promise. Bob tries his best to bake the cake in order to fulfill
his promise, and happens to succeed. In trying to bake the cake, Bob acted for
the end of producing a cake. But producing the cake was worthless, since no
one would eat it. The only value was in the trying, since that was the
fulfillment of his promise.

I wore moderately worn (one small hole) and comfortable 5.10 Anasazi shoes, a
Camp USA Energy harness, shorts and a T-shirt. (I have not received any
sponsorship.) My belayer used a tube-style device and wore belay gloves.

Most of my practice was with an auto-belay, and at a shorter distance per
climb (and hence greater number of climbs needed) since the auto-belay makes
it impossible to get to the top of the wall. The auto-belay is also spring
loaded so it effectively decreases body weight (by 7 lbs at the bottom
according to my measurement). Then a couple of weeks ago the auto-belay was
closed by management due to a maintenance issue, and I had a break in training
until the Wednesday before the official attempt when I trained with a manual
belay.

I climbed in sets of 10. The planned pace was 8:18 per set and a 44-45 second
rest between sets (clock runs during rests,), averaging at 49.8 seconds per
climb including descent. I was always ahead of pace, and I occasionally took a
mini break at the mid-point time if I was too far ahead.

In the morning I stress-baked pumpkin muffins for myself and the volunteers. I
had the muffins, water and loose chalk on a table for use during breaks.

The top of the wall is 15.13 meters vertically from the ground (as measured by
a geology grad student), at 3.5 degree slab.

About half-way through, I ducked into the storage area inside the rock and
changed to a dry shirt.

On the ground there was a sheet of paper with the start and end times of each
break printed in large letters (calculated by [this
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/10e364904dfcc19b043a594232e0acde)), as
well as the mid-point time for each set of 10 to keep me better on pace.

I trained for about three months, not very heavily. In training did two
unofficial full-length practice runs, and in each I beat the previous record:
in the first one I got 947.1 meters and in the second I got 1004.5, so I was
pretty confident I could beat the 928.5 meters on the official attempt (though
I was still pretty nervous). I also trained by doing a small number of
approximately 1/2 or 1/3 sized practices (maybe three or so), and more regular
shorter runs (1-10 climbs) at fast pace.

And now for something not very philosophical. Today, in front of two witnesses
and two timekeepers and with the help of Levi Durham doing an amazing feat of
belaying me for an hour, I beat the [Guinness World
Record](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/438677-greatest-
vertical-distance-climbed-on-an-artificial-climbing-wall-in-1-hour-indi) in
greatest vertical distance climbed in one hour on an indoor climbing wall. The
previous record was 928.5m and I did 1013.7m (with about half a minute to
spare). On Baylor's climbing wall, this involved 67 climbs divided into sets
of 10 (the last was 7), with about a minute of rest between sets (the clock
kept on running during the rest).

A Kindle Fire running a pre-release version of my [Giant
Stopwatch](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=omegacentauri.mobi.simplestopwatch&hl=en_US&gl=US)
app provided unofficial timing for audience to see and for my pacing. I had to
modify the app to have a periodic beep to meet Guinness's requirements of an
audible stop signal.

I was actually really stressed yesterday. I had already beaten the record
unofficially in practice, but with lots of people coming to watch (local
climbers, grad students and colleagues), I didn't want to disappoint.
Contributing to the stress was that the conditions changed from my practice
runs (the auto-belay was down from maintenance and I had to use a manual
belay; this involved lengthening the route slightly, increasing the length of
each set and decreasing the total count, as well as an effective increase in
my weight since the auto-belay subtracts a few pounds due to its spring-
loading), and that I hadn't been able to train on the particular route for
several weeks prior to Wednesday due to the auto-belay being down for
maintenance while on Wednesday's approximately half-distance-at-half-time
practice I was more tired at the end than I should have been due to poor
pacing.

Since Guinness requires video proof in addition to human witnesses, in the
interests of redundancy, I had three cameras pointed at the attempt. The best
footage (above) is from a Sony A7R2 with a zoom lens at 16mm, producing 1080P
at 59.94 fps. Video was processed with Adobe Premiere Rush. The processing
consisted of trimming the start and end, and adding a timing video track I
generated with a [Python OpenCV2
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/3a705c859d4ea4a482c4e47e96a08f79),
synchronized with single-frame precision at the 1:00:00 point with the footage
of Giant Stopwatch (barely visible under the table towards the end of the
video; early in the video, glare hides it). For the unofficial version I link
above, I accelerated the middle climbs 10X in Premiere Rush.

The route was a standard 5.7 grade for most of my training (including when I
unofficially beat the records), with Rock management kindly agreeing to keep
the route up for several months for me. For the final attempt, we added holds
to make the finish at the top of the wall, and changed three other holds to
easier ones. (Guinness has no route grade requirements.)

You should make a living out of that, Alex.  
Would give you a lot less stress.

Whether such a limited way of waging war could be successful probably depends
on the case. If one combined the non-lethal (or not intentionally lethal)
means with technological and numerical superiority, it wouldn’t be surprising
to me if one could win.

Third, we might subdivide moderate pacifists based on whether they prohibit
all violence that foreseeably leads to death or just violence that
intentionally leads to death. If it is only intentionally lethal violence that
is forbidden, then quite a bit of modern warfare can stand. If the enemy is
attacking with tanks or planes, one can intentionally destroy the tank or
plane as a weapon, while only foreseeing, without intending, the death of the
crew. (I don’t know how far one can take this line without sophistry. Can one
drop a bomb on an infantry unit intending to smash up their rifles without
intending to kill the soldiers?) Similarly, one can bomb enemy weapons
factories.

I’ve been wondering whether it is possible for a country to count as pacifist
and yet wage a defensive war. I think the answer is positive, as long as one
has a moderate pacifism that is opposed to lethal violence but not to all
violence. I think that a prohibition of all violence is untenable. It seems
obvious that if you see someone about to shoot an innocent person, and you can
give the shooter a shove to make them miss, you presumptively should.

Second, “lethal” weapons can be used less than lethally. For instance, with
modern medicine, abdominal gunshot wounds are only 10% fatal, yet they are no
doubt very effective at stopping an attacker. While it may seem weird to
imagine a pacifist shooting someone in the stomach, when the chance of
survival is 90%, it does not seem unreasonable to say that the pacifist could
be aiming to stop the attacker non-lethally. After all, tasers sometimes kill,
too. They do so less than 0.25% of the time, but that’s a difference of degree
rather than of principle.

First, we have “officially” non-lethal weapons: tasers, gas, etc. Some of
these might violate current international law, but it seems that a pacifist
country could modify its commitment to some accords.

These may seem to be consequentialist arguments. I don't think so. I don't
have the same intuitions if we replace the general by the general's innocent
child in (2) and (4), even if killing the child were to stop the war (e.g., by
making the general afraid that their other children would be murdered).

If you can tase one person to stop the murder of ten, then (1) should be
permissible if it’s the only option. But tasers occasionally kill people. We
don’t know how often. Apparently it’s [less than 1 in
400](https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/investigations/2021/04/23/police-
use-tasers-ends-hundreds-deaths-like-daunte-wright/7221153002/) uses. Suppose
it’s 1 in 4000. Then option (1) results in 250 enemy deaths.

Alex  
  
Doesn't you post here entail that we should murder Putin?

Now, imagine that one person is attacking you and nine other innocents, with
the intent of killing the ten of you, and you can stop them with a taser.
Surely you should, and surely the moderate pacifist will say that this is an
appropriate use case for the taser.

Alex  
  
Of course one should never murder anyone, but the question is: would killing
Putin be murder?

I think (4) is still morally preferable to causing the kind of disruption to
the lives of a million people that plan (3) would involve.

So maybe our choice is between tasing a million, thereby non-intentionally
killing 250 soldiers, and intentionally killing one general. It seems to me
that (2) is morally preferable, even though our moderate pacifist has to allow
(1) and forbid (2).

Very well. Now consider this on a national level. Suppose there are a million
enemy soldiers ordered to commit genocide against ten million, and you have
two ways to stop them:

One should never murder anyone. Killing, on the other hand, can sometimes be
justified.  
  
One question about killing the leader of an invading country is whether the
leader counts as a civilian, since the killing of civilians is forbidden by
the Geneva Convention. There is also some worry about the Geneva Convention's
killing by "perfidy", which is taken to rule out at least some assassinations.
So, as a matter of positive international law, it seems a difficult question.  
  
Were there no international law on the matter, I wouldn't see a significant
difference between killing a political leader and killing a general, if both
are giving orders to fight. Morally speaking, but not necessarily in
international law, both seem to me to be equally combatants.  
  
Besides the moral and legal questions, there is also a prudential question. In
my post I assumed that killing the general would stop the invasion. I got to
assume that because I was making up the case. Whether in actual fact killing a
leader would stop an invasion is less clear. Indeed such a thing might be seen
as such a serious attack on the country that the retaliation might be really
horrific.

Imagine a moderate pacifist who rejects lethal self-defense, but allows non-
lethal self-defense when appropriate, say by use of tasers.

Note that a version of this argument goes through even if the moderate
pacifist backs up and says that tasers are too lethal. For suppose instead of
tasers we have drones that destroy the dominant hand of an enemy soldier while
guaranteeing survival (with science fictional medical technology). It’s
clearly right to release such a drone on a soldier who is about to kill ten
innocents. But now compare:

A normative power is a power to change a normative condition.
[Raz](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/230182259.pdf) says the change is not
produced “causally” but “normatively”.

Perhaps the real problem for a lot of people with a causal view of normative
powers is that it tends to lead to a violation of supervenience. For if it is
metaphysically possble to have the exercise of the normative power without the
exercise of the natural power, or vice versa, then it seems we don’t have
supervenience of the normative on the non-normative. But supervenience does
not seem to me to be inescapable.

I think the difficulty with a causal model is the fact that in paradigm cases
of normative power, there is a natural power that _is_ being exercised, and we
have the intuition that the exercise of the natural power is necessary and
sufficient for the normative effect. But on a causal model, why couldn’t I
cause a promissory-type obligation without promising, simply causing the
relevant property of being obligated to come to be instantiated in me? And why
couldn’t I engage in the speech act while yet remaining normatively unbound,
because my normative power wasn’t exercised in parallel with the natural
power?

Maybe the answer to both questions is that I could, but only metaphysically
and not causally. In other words, it could be that the laws of nature, or of
human nature, make it impossible for me to exercise one of the powers without
the other, just as I cannot wiggle my ring finger without wiggling my middle
finger as well. On this view, if there is a God, he could cause me to acquire
promissory-type obligations without my promising, and he could let me engage
in the natural act of promising while blocking the exercise of normative power
and leaving me normatively unbound. This doesn’t seem particularly
problematic.

There are two versions of the above model. On one version, there is an
underlying fundamental conditional normative fact _C_ , such as that if I have
promised something then I should do it, and my exercise of normative power
supplies the antecedent _A_ of that conditional, and then the normative
consequent of _C_ comes to be grounded in _C_ and _A_. On another version,
there there are some natural acts that are directly constitutive of a
normative state of affairs, not merely by supplying the antecedent of a
conditional normative fact. I think the first version of the model is the more
plausible in paradigmatic cases.

But why not allow for a causal model? Why not suppose that a normative power
is a causal power to make an irreducible normative property come to be
instantiated in someone? Thus, my power to promise is the power to cause
myself to be obligated to do what I have promised.

Here is a picture on which this is correct. We exercise a normative power by
exercising a natural power in such a context that the successful exercise of
the natural power is partly constitutive of a normative fact. For instance, we
utter a promise, thereby exercising a natural power to engage in a certain
kind of speech act, and our exercise of that speech act is partly constitutive
of, rather than causal of, the state of affairs of our being obligated to
carry out the promised action.

I was going to leave it at this. But then I thought of a way to save the
strong guise of the good thesis. Success is valuable as such. When I try to do
something, succeeding at it has value. So the arm going up or the cake being
produced _are_ valuable as necessary parts of the success of one’s action. So
perhaps every end of your action _is_ trivially good, because it is good for
your action to succeed, and the end is a (constitutive, not causal) means to
success.

**Strong** : Whenever you act, you act for an end, and every end you act for
you perceive as good.

**Case 2:** Back when they were dating in high school, Bob promised to try his
best to bake a nine-layer chocolate cake for Alice’s 40th birthday. Since
then, Bob and Alice have had a falling out, and hate each other’s guts.
Moreover, Alice and all her guests hate chocolate. But Alice doesn’t release
Bob from his promise. Bob tries his best to bake the cake in order to fulfill
his promise, and happens to succeed. In trying to bake the cake, Bob acted for
the end of producing a cake. But producing the cake was worthless, since no
one would eat it. The only value was in the trying, since that was the
fulfillment of his promise.

According to the guise of the good thesis, one always acts for the sake of an
apparent good. There is a weaker and a stronger version of this:

But perhaps we can say this. We have a normative power to endow some neutral
things with value by making them our ends. And in fact the only way to act for
an end that does not have any independent value is by exercising that
normative power. And exercising that normative power involves your seeing the
thing you’re endowing with value as valuable. And maybe the only way to raise
your arm or for Bob to bake the cake in the examples is by exercising the
normative power, and doing so involves seeing the end as good. Maybe. This has
some phenomenological plausibility and it would be nice if it were true,
because the strong guise of the good thesis is pretty plausible to me.

I think there is still reason to be sceptical of the strong version.

This isn’t quite enough for a defense of the strong thesis. For even if the
success is good, it does not follow that you perceive the success as good. You
might subscribe to an axiological theory on which success is not good in
general, but only success at something good.

**Case 1:** There is some device which does something useful when you trigger
it. It is triggered by electrical activity. You strap it on to your arm, and
raise your arm, so that the electrical activity in your muscles triggers the
device. Your raising your arm has the arm going up as an end, but that end is
not perceived as good, but merely neutral. All you care about is the
electrical activity in your muscles.

In both cases, it is still true that the agent acts for a good end—the useful
triggering of the device and the production of the cake. But in both cases it
seems they are also acting for a worthless end. Thus the cases seem to fit
with the weak but not the strong guise of the good thesis.

**Weak** : Whenever you act, you act for an end that you perceive is good.

For the strong version to have any plausibility, “good” must include cases of
purely instrumental goodness.

And now for something not very philosophical. Today, in front of two witnesses
and two timekeepers and with the help of Levi Durham doing an amazing feat of
belaying me for an hour, I beat the [Guinness World
Record](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/438677-greatest-
vertical-distance-climbed-on-an-artificial-climbing-wall-in-1-hour-indi) in
greatest vertical distance climbed in one hour on an indoor climbing wall. The
previous record was 928.5m and I did 1013.7m (with about half a minute to
spare). On Baylor's climbing wall, this involved 67 climbs divided into sets
of 10 (the last was 7), with about a minute of rest between sets (the clock
kept on running during the rest).

I was actually really stressed yesterday. I had already beaten the record
unofficially in practice, but with lots of people coming to watch (local
climbers, grad students and colleagues), I didn't want to disappoint.
Contributing to the stress was that the conditions changed from my practice
runs (the auto-belay was down from maintenance and I had to use a manual
belay; this involved lengthening the route slightly, increasing the length of
each set and decreasing the total count, as well as an effective increase in
my weight since the auto-belay subtracts a few pounds due to its spring-
loading), and that I hadn't been able to train on the particular route for
several weeks prior to Wednesday due to the auto-belay being down for
maintenance while on Wednesday's approximately half-distance-at-half-time
practice I was more tired at the end than I should have been due to poor
pacing.

About half-way through, I ducked into the storage area inside the rock and
changed to a dry shirt.

The top of the wall is 15.13 meters vertically from the ground (as measured by
a geology grad student), at 3.5 degree slab.

Since Guinness requires video proof in addition to human witnesses, in the
interests of redundancy, I had three cameras pointed at the attempt. The best
footage (above) is from a Sony A7R2 with a zoom lens at 16mm, producing 1080P
at 59.94 fps. Video was processed with Adobe Premiere Rush. The processing
consisted of trimming the start and end, and adding a timing video track I
generated with a [Python OpenCV2
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/3a705c859d4ea4a482c4e47e96a08f79),
synchronized with single-frame precision at the 1:00:00 point with the footage
of Giant Stopwatch (barely visible under the table towards the end of the
video; early in the video, glare hides it). For the unofficial version I link
above, I accelerated the middle climbs 10X in Premiere Rush.

On the ground there was a sheet of paper with the start and end times of each
break printed in large letters (calculated by [this
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/10e364904dfcc19b043a594232e0acde)), as
well as the mid-point time for each set of 10 to keep me better on pace.

Most of my practice was with an auto-belay, and at a shorter distance per
climb (and hence greater number of climbs needed) since the auto-belay makes
it impossible to get to the top of the wall. The auto-belay is also spring
loaded so it effectively decreases body weight (by 7 lbs at the bottom
according to my measurement). Then a couple of weeks ago the auto-belay was
closed by management due to a maintenance issue, and I had a break in training
until the Wednesday before the official attempt when I trained with a manual
belay.

I climbed in sets of 10. The planned pace was 8:18 per set and a 44-45 second
rest between sets (clock runs during rests,), averaging at 49.8 seconds per
climb including descent. I was always ahead of pace, and I occasionally took a
mini break at the mid-point time if I was too far ahead.

A Kindle Fire running a pre-release version of my [Giant
Stopwatch](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=omegacentauri.mobi.simplestopwatch&hl=en_US&gl=US)
app provided unofficial timing for audience to see and for my pacing. I had to
modify the app to have a periodic beep to meet Guinness's requirements of an
audible stop signal.

The route was a standard 5.7 grade for most of my training (including when I
unofficially beat the records), with Rock management kindly agreeing to keep
the route up for several months for me. For the final attempt, we added holds
to make the finish at the top of the wall, and changed three other holds to
easier ones. (Guinness has no route grade requirements.)

I wore moderately worn (one small hole) and comfortable 5.10 Anasazi shoes, a
Camp USA Energy harness, shorts and a T-shirt. (I have not received any
sponsorship.) My belayer used a tube-style device and wore belay gloves.

In the morning I stress-baked pumpkin muffins for myself and the volunteers. I
had the muffins, water and loose chalk on a table for use during breaks.

I trained for about three months, not very heavily. In training did two
unofficial full-length practice runs, and in each I beat the previous record:
in the first one I got 947.1 meters and in the second I got 1004.5, so I was
pretty confident I could beat the 928.5 meters on the official attempt (though
I was still pretty nervous). I also trained by doing a small number of
approximately 1/2 or 1/3 sized practices (maybe three or so), and more regular
shorter runs (1-10 climbs) at fast pace.

You should make a living out of that, Alex.  
Would give you a lot less stress.

Whether such a limited way of waging war could be successful probably depends
on the case. If one combined the non-lethal (or not intentionally lethal)
means with technological and numerical superiority, it wouldn’t be surprising
to me if one could win.

I’ve been wondering whether it is possible for a country to count as pacifist
and yet wage a defensive war. I think the answer is positive, as long as one
has a moderate pacifism that is opposed to lethal violence but not to all
violence. I think that a prohibition of all violence is untenable. It seems
obvious that if you see someone about to shoot an innocent person, and you can
give the shooter a shove to make them miss, you presumptively should.

Third, we might subdivide moderate pacifists based on whether they prohibit
all violence that foreseeably leads to death or just violence that
intentionally leads to death. If it is only intentionally lethal violence that
is forbidden, then quite a bit of modern warfare can stand. If the enemy is
attacking with tanks or planes, one can intentionally destroy the tank or
plane as a weapon, while only foreseeing, without intending, the death of the
crew. (I don’t know how far one can take this line without sophistry. Can one
drop a bomb on an infantry unit intending to smash up their rifles without
intending to kill the soldiers?) Similarly, one can bomb enemy weapons
factories.

Second, “lethal” weapons can be used less than lethally. For instance, with
modern medicine, abdominal gunshot wounds are only 10% fatal, yet they are no
doubt very effective at stopping an attacker. While it may seem weird to
imagine a pacifist shooting someone in the stomach, when the chance of
survival is 90%, it does not seem unreasonable to say that the pacifist could
be aiming to stop the attacker non-lethally. After all, tasers sometimes kill,
too. They do so less than 0.25% of the time, but that’s a difference of degree
rather than of principle.

First, we have “officially” non-lethal weapons: tasers, gas, etc. Some of
these might violate current international law, but it seems that a pacifist
country could modify its commitment to some accords.

These may seem to be consequentialist arguments. I don't think so. I don't
have the same intuitions if we replace the general by the general's innocent
child in (2) and (4), even if killing the child were to stop the war (e.g., by
making the general afraid that their other children would be murdered).

So maybe our choice is between tasing a million, thereby non-intentionally
killing 250 soldiers, and intentionally killing one general. It seems to me
that (2) is morally preferable, even though our moderate pacifist has to allow
(1) and forbid (2).

If you can tase one person to stop the murder of ten, then (1) should be
permissible if it’s the only option. But tasers occasionally kill people. We
don’t know how often. Apparently it’s [less than 1 in
400](https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/investigations/2021/04/23/police-
use-tasers-ends-hundreds-deaths-like-daunte-wright/7221153002/) uses. Suppose
it’s 1 in 4000. Then option (1) results in 250 enemy deaths.

I think (4) is still morally preferable to causing the kind of disruption to
the lives of a million people that plan (3) would involve.

Alex  
  
Doesn't you post here entail that we should murder Putin?

Very well. Now consider this on a national level. Suppose there are a million
enemy soldiers ordered to commit genocide against ten million, and you have
two ways to stop them:

One should never murder anyone. Killing, on the other hand, can sometimes be
justified.  
  
One question about killing the leader of an invading country is whether the
leader counts as a civilian, since the killing of civilians is forbidden by
the Geneva Convention. There is also some worry about the Geneva Convention's
killing by "perfidy", which is taken to rule out at least some assassinations.
So, as a matter of positive international law, it seems a difficult question.  
  
Were there no international law on the matter, I wouldn't see a significant
difference between killing a political leader and killing a general, if both
are giving orders to fight. Morally speaking, but not necessarily in
international law, both seem to me to be equally combatants.  
  
Besides the moral and legal questions, there is also a prudential question. In
my post I assumed that killing the general would stop the invasion. I got to
assume that because I was making up the case. Whether in actual fact killing a
leader would stop an invasion is less clear. Indeed such a thing might be seen
as such a serious attack on the country that the retaliation might be really
horrific.

Alex  
  
Of course one should never murder anyone, but the question is: would killing
Putin be murder?

Now, imagine that one person is attacking you and nine other innocents, with
the intent of killing the ten of you, and you can stop them with a taser.
Surely you should, and surely the moderate pacifist will say that this is an
appropriate use case for the taser.

Imagine a moderate pacifist who rejects lethal self-defense, but allows non-
lethal self-defense when appropriate, say by use of tasers.

Note that a version of this argument goes through even if the moderate
pacifist backs up and says that tasers are too lethal. For suppose instead of
tasers we have drones that destroy the dominant hand of an enemy soldier while
guaranteeing survival (with science fictional medical technology). It’s
clearly right to release such a drone on a soldier who is about to kill ten
innocents. But now compare:

Here is a picture on which this is correct. We exercise a normative power by
exercising a natural power in such a context that the successful exercise of
the natural power is partly constitutive of a normative fact. For instance, we
utter a promise, thereby exercising a natural power to engage in a certain
kind of speech act, and our exercise of that speech act is partly constitutive
of, rather than causal of, the state of affairs of our being obligated to
carry out the promised action.

There are two versions of the above model. On one version, there is an
underlying fundamental conditional normative fact _C_ , such as that if I have
promised something then I should do it, and my exercise of normative power
supplies the antecedent _A_ of that conditional, and then the normative
consequent of _C_ comes to be grounded in _C_ and _A_. On another version,
there there are some natural acts that are directly constitutive of a
normative state of affairs, not merely by supplying the antecedent of a
conditional normative fact. I think the first version of the model is the more
plausible in paradigmatic cases.

A normative power is a power to change a normative condition.
[Raz](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/230182259.pdf) says the change is not
produced “causally” but “normatively”.

I think the difficulty with a causal model is the fact that in paradigm cases
of normative power, there is a natural power that _is_ being exercised, and we
have the intuition that the exercise of the natural power is necessary and
sufficient for the normative effect. But on a causal model, why couldn’t I
cause a promissory-type obligation without promising, simply causing the
relevant property of being obligated to come to be instantiated in me? And why
couldn’t I engage in the speech act while yet remaining normatively unbound,
because my normative power wasn’t exercised in parallel with the natural
power?

Perhaps the real problem for a lot of people with a causal view of normative
powers is that it tends to lead to a violation of supervenience. For if it is
metaphysically possble to have the exercise of the normative power without the
exercise of the natural power, or vice versa, then it seems we don’t have
supervenience of the normative on the non-normative. But supervenience does
not seem to me to be inescapable.

But why not allow for a causal model? Why not suppose that a normative power
is a causal power to make an irreducible normative property come to be
instantiated in someone? Thus, my power to promise is the power to cause
myself to be obligated to do what I have promised.

Maybe the answer to both questions is that I could, but only metaphysically
and not causally. In other words, it could be that the laws of nature, or of
human nature, make it impossible for me to exercise one of the powers without
the other, just as I cannot wiggle my ring finger without wiggling my middle
finger as well. On this view, if there is a God, he could cause me to acquire
promissory-type obligations without my promising, and he could let me engage
in the natural act of promising while blocking the exercise of normative power
and leaving me normatively unbound. This doesn’t seem particularly
problematic.

I think there is still reason to be sceptical of the strong version.

For the strong version to have any plausibility, “good” must include cases of
purely instrumental goodness.

This isn’t quite enough for a defense of the strong thesis. For even if the
success is good, it does not follow that you perceive the success as good. You
might subscribe to an axiological theory on which success is not good in
general, but only success at something good.

**Weak** : Whenever you act, you act for an end that you perceive is good.

I was going to leave it at this. But then I thought of a way to save the
strong guise of the good thesis. Success is valuable as such. When I try to do
something, succeeding at it has value. So the arm going up or the cake being
produced _are_ valuable as necessary parts of the success of one’s action. So
perhaps every end of your action _is_ trivially good, because it is good for
your action to succeed, and the end is a (constitutive, not causal) means to
success.

But perhaps we can say this. We have a normative power to endow some neutral
things with value by making them our ends. And in fact the only way to act for
an end that does not have any independent value is by exercising that
normative power. And exercising that normative power involves your seeing the
thing you’re endowing with value as valuable. And maybe the only way to raise
your arm or for Bob to bake the cake in the examples is by exercising the
normative power, and doing so involves seeing the end as good. Maybe. This has
some phenomenological plausibility and it would be nice if it were true,
because the strong guise of the good thesis is pretty plausible to me.

**Case 1:** There is some device which does something useful when you trigger
it. It is triggered by electrical activity. You strap it on to your arm, and
raise your arm, so that the electrical activity in your muscles triggers the
device. Your raising your arm has the arm going up as an end, but that end is
not perceived as good, but merely neutral. All you care about is the
electrical activity in your muscles.

According to the guise of the good thesis, one always acts for the sake of an
apparent good. There is a weaker and a stronger version of this:

**Case 2:** Back when they were dating in high school, Bob promised to try his
best to bake a nine-layer chocolate cake for Alice’s 40th birthday. Since
then, Bob and Alice have had a falling out, and hate each other’s guts.
Moreover, Alice and all her guests hate chocolate. But Alice doesn’t release
Bob from his promise. Bob tries his best to bake the cake in order to fulfill
his promise, and happens to succeed. In trying to bake the cake, Bob acted for
the end of producing a cake. But producing the cake was worthless, since no
one would eat it. The only value was in the trying, since that was the
fulfillment of his promise.

**Strong** : Whenever you act, you act for an end, and every end you act for
you perceive as good.

In both cases, it is still true that the agent acts for a good end—the useful
triggering of the device and the production of the cake. But in both cases it
seems they are also acting for a worthless end. Thus the cases seem to fit
with the weak but not the strong guise of the good thesis.

I trained for about three months, not very heavily. In training did two
unofficial full-length practice runs, and in each I beat the previous record:
in the first one I got 947.1 meters and in the second I got 1004.5, so I was
pretty confident I could beat the 928.5 meters on the official attempt (though
I was still pretty nervous). I also trained by doing a small number of
approximately 1/2 or 1/3 sized practices (maybe three or so), and more regular
shorter runs (1-10 climbs) at fast pace.

I wore moderately worn (one small hole) and comfortable 5.10 Anasazi shoes, a
Camp USA Energy harness, shorts and a T-shirt. (I have not received any
sponsorship.) My belayer used a tube-style device and wore belay gloves.

The route was a standard 5.7 grade for most of my training (including when I
unofficially beat the records), with Rock management kindly agreeing to keep
the route up for several months for me. For the final attempt, we added holds
to make the finish at the top of the wall, and changed three other holds to
easier ones. (Guinness has no route grade requirements.)

You should make a living out of that, Alex.  
Would give you a lot less stress.

Most of my practice was with an auto-belay, and at a shorter distance per
climb (and hence greater number of climbs needed) since the auto-belay makes
it impossible to get to the top of the wall. The auto-belay is also spring
loaded so it effectively decreases body weight (by 7 lbs at the bottom
according to my measurement). Then a couple of weeks ago the auto-belay was
closed by management due to a maintenance issue, and I had a break in training
until the Wednesday before the official attempt when I trained with a manual
belay.

And now for something not very philosophical. Today, in front of two witnesses
and two timekeepers and with the help of Levi Durham doing an amazing feat of
belaying me for an hour, I beat the [Guinness World
Record](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/438677-greatest-
vertical-distance-climbed-on-an-artificial-climbing-wall-in-1-hour-indi) in
greatest vertical distance climbed in one hour on an indoor climbing wall. The
previous record was 928.5m and I did 1013.7m (with about half a minute to
spare). On Baylor's climbing wall, this involved 67 climbs divided into sets
of 10 (the last was 7), with about a minute of rest between sets (the clock
kept on running during the rest).

I climbed in sets of 10. The planned pace was 8:18 per set and a 44-45 second
rest between sets (clock runs during rests,), averaging at 49.8 seconds per
climb including descent. I was always ahead of pace, and I occasionally took a
mini break at the mid-point time if I was too far ahead.

About half-way through, I ducked into the storage area inside the rock and
changed to a dry shirt.

In the morning I stress-baked pumpkin muffins for myself and the volunteers. I
had the muffins, water and loose chalk on a table for use during breaks.

On the ground there was a sheet of paper with the start and end times of each
break printed in large letters (calculated by [this
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/10e364904dfcc19b043a594232e0acde)), as
well as the mid-point time for each set of 10 to keep me better on pace.

The top of the wall is 15.13 meters vertically from the ground (as measured by
a geology grad student), at 3.5 degree slab.

I was actually really stressed yesterday. I had already beaten the record
unofficially in practice, but with lots of people coming to watch (local
climbers, grad students and colleagues), I didn't want to disappoint.
Contributing to the stress was that the conditions changed from my practice
runs (the auto-belay was down from maintenance and I had to use a manual
belay; this involved lengthening the route slightly, increasing the length of
each set and decreasing the total count, as well as an effective increase in
my weight since the auto-belay subtracts a few pounds due to its spring-
loading), and that I hadn't been able to train on the particular route for
several weeks prior to Wednesday due to the auto-belay being down for
maintenance while on Wednesday's approximately half-distance-at-half-time
practice I was more tired at the end than I should have been due to poor
pacing.

A Kindle Fire running a pre-release version of my [Giant
Stopwatch](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=omegacentauri.mobi.simplestopwatch&hl=en_US&gl=US)
app provided unofficial timing for audience to see and for my pacing. I had to
modify the app to have a periodic beep to meet Guinness's requirements of an
audible stop signal.

Since Guinness requires video proof in addition to human witnesses, in the
interests of redundancy, I had three cameras pointed at the attempt. The best
footage (above) is from a Sony A7R2 with a zoom lens at 16mm, producing 1080P
at 59.94 fps. Video was processed with Adobe Premiere Rush. The processing
consisted of trimming the start and end, and adding a timing video track I
generated with a [Python OpenCV2
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/3a705c859d4ea4a482c4e47e96a08f79),
synchronized with single-frame precision at the 1:00:00 point with the footage
of Giant Stopwatch (barely visible under the table towards the end of the
video; early in the video, glare hides it). For the unofficial version I link
above, I accelerated the middle climbs 10X in Premiere Rush.

Second, “lethal” weapons can be used less than lethally. For instance, with
modern medicine, abdominal gunshot wounds are only 10% fatal, yet they are no
doubt very effective at stopping an attacker. While it may seem weird to
imagine a pacifist shooting someone in the stomach, when the chance of
survival is 90%, it does not seem unreasonable to say that the pacifist could
be aiming to stop the attacker non-lethally. After all, tasers sometimes kill,
too. They do so less than 0.25% of the time, but that’s a difference of degree
rather than of principle.

I’ve been wondering whether it is possible for a country to count as pacifist
and yet wage a defensive war. I think the answer is positive, as long as one
has a moderate pacifism that is opposed to lethal violence but not to all
violence. I think that a prohibition of all violence is untenable. It seems
obvious that if you see someone about to shoot an innocent person, and you can
give the shooter a shove to make them miss, you presumptively should.

First, we have “officially” non-lethal weapons: tasers, gas, etc. Some of
these might violate current international law, but it seems that a pacifist
country could modify its commitment to some accords.

Third, we might subdivide moderate pacifists based on whether they prohibit
all violence that foreseeably leads to death or just violence that
intentionally leads to death. If it is only intentionally lethal violence that
is forbidden, then quite a bit of modern warfare can stand. If the enemy is
attacking with tanks or planes, one can intentionally destroy the tank or
plane as a weapon, while only foreseeing, without intending, the death of the
crew. (I don’t know how far one can take this line without sophistry. Can one
drop a bomb on an infantry unit intending to smash up their rifles without
intending to kill the soldiers?) Similarly, one can bomb enemy weapons
factories.

Whether such a limited way of waging war could be successful probably depends
on the case. If one combined the non-lethal (or not intentionally lethal)
means with technological and numerical superiority, it wouldn’t be surprising
to me if one could win.

Alex  
  
Doesn't you post here entail that we should murder Putin?

Imagine a moderate pacifist who rejects lethal self-defense, but allows non-
lethal self-defense when appropriate, say by use of tasers.

Note that a version of this argument goes through even if the moderate
pacifist backs up and says that tasers are too lethal. For suppose instead of
tasers we have drones that destroy the dominant hand of an enemy soldier while
guaranteeing survival (with science fictional medical technology). It’s
clearly right to release such a drone on a soldier who is about to kill ten
innocents. But now compare:

So maybe our choice is between tasing a million, thereby non-intentionally
killing 250 soldiers, and intentionally killing one general. It seems to me
that (2) is morally preferable, even though our moderate pacifist has to allow
(1) and forbid (2).

Very well. Now consider this on a national level. Suppose there are a million
enemy soldiers ordered to commit genocide against ten million, and you have
two ways to stop them:

Alex  
  
Of course one should never murder anyone, but the question is: would killing
Putin be murder?

Now, imagine that one person is attacking you and nine other innocents, with
the intent of killing the ten of you, and you can stop them with a taser.
Surely you should, and surely the moderate pacifist will say that this is an
appropriate use case for the taser.

I think (4) is still morally preferable to causing the kind of disruption to
the lives of a million people that plan (3) would involve.

If you can tase one person to stop the murder of ten, then (1) should be
permissible if it’s the only option. But tasers occasionally kill people. We
don’t know how often. Apparently it’s [less than 1 in
400](https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/investigations/2021/04/23/police-
use-tasers-ends-hundreds-deaths-like-daunte-wright/7221153002/) uses. Suppose
it’s 1 in 4000. Then option (1) results in 250 enemy deaths.

One should never murder anyone. Killing, on the other hand, can sometimes be
justified.  
  
One question about killing the leader of an invading country is whether the
leader counts as a civilian, since the killing of civilians is forbidden by
the Geneva Convention. There is also some worry about the Geneva Convention's
killing by "perfidy", which is taken to rule out at least some assassinations.
So, as a matter of positive international law, it seems a difficult question.  
  
Were there no international law on the matter, I wouldn't see a significant
difference between killing a political leader and killing a general, if both
are giving orders to fight. Morally speaking, but not necessarily in
international law, both seem to me to be equally combatants.  
  
Besides the moral and legal questions, there is also a prudential question. In
my post I assumed that killing the general would stop the invasion. I got to
assume that because I was making up the case. Whether in actual fact killing a
leader would stop an invasion is less clear. Indeed such a thing might be seen
as such a serious attack on the country that the retaliation might be really
horrific.

These may seem to be consequentialist arguments. I don't think so. I don't
have the same intuitions if we replace the general by the general's innocent
child in (2) and (4), even if killing the child were to stop the war (e.g., by
making the general afraid that their other children would be murdered).

Since Guinness requires video proof in addition to human witnesses, in the
interests of redundancy, I had three cameras pointed at the attempt. The best
footage (above) is from a Sony A7R2 with a zoom lens at 16mm, producing 1080P
at 59.94 fps. Video was processed with Adobe Premiere Rush. The processing
consisted of trimming the start and end, and adding a timing video track I
generated with a [Python OpenCV2
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/3a705c859d4ea4a482c4e47e96a08f79),
synchronized with single-frame precision at the 1:00:00 point with the footage
of Giant Stopwatch (barely visible under the table towards the end of the
video; early in the video, glare hides it). For the unofficial version I link
above, I accelerated the middle climbs 10X in Premiere Rush.

Most of my practice was with an auto-belay, and at a shorter distance per
climb (and hence greater number of climbs needed) since the auto-belay makes
it impossible to get to the top of the wall. The auto-belay is also spring
loaded so it effectively decreases body weight (by 7 lbs at the bottom
according to my measurement). Then a couple of weeks ago the auto-belay was
closed by management due to a maintenance issue, and I had a break in training
until the Wednesday before the official attempt when I trained with a manual
belay.

About half-way through, I ducked into the storage area inside the rock and
changed to a dry shirt.

And now for something not very philosophical. Today, in front of two witnesses
and two timekeepers and with the help of Levi Durham doing an amazing feat of
belaying me for an hour, I beat the [Guinness World
Record](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/438677-greatest-
vertical-distance-climbed-on-an-artificial-climbing-wall-in-1-hour-indi) in
greatest vertical distance climbed in one hour on an indoor climbing wall. The
previous record was 928.5m and I did 1013.7m (with about half a minute to
spare). On Baylor's climbing wall, this involved 67 climbs divided into sets
of 10 (the last was 7), with about a minute of rest between sets (the clock
kept on running during the rest).

You should make a living out of that, Alex.  
Would give you a lot less stress.

I was actually really stressed yesterday. I had already beaten the record
unofficially in practice, but with lots of people coming to watch (local
climbers, grad students and colleagues), I didn't want to disappoint.
Contributing to the stress was that the conditions changed from my practice
runs (the auto-belay was down from maintenance and I had to use a manual
belay; this involved lengthening the route slightly, increasing the length of
each set and decreasing the total count, as well as an effective increase in
my weight since the auto-belay subtracts a few pounds due to its spring-
loading), and that I hadn't been able to train on the particular route for
several weeks prior to Wednesday due to the auto-belay being down for
maintenance while on Wednesday's approximately half-distance-at-half-time
practice I was more tired at the end than I should have been due to poor
pacing.

The route was a standard 5.7 grade for most of my training (including when I
unofficially beat the records), with Rock management kindly agreeing to keep
the route up for several months for me. For the final attempt, we added holds
to make the finish at the top of the wall, and changed three other holds to
easier ones. (Guinness has no route grade requirements.)

I trained for about three months, not very heavily. In training did two
unofficial full-length practice runs, and in each I beat the previous record:
in the first one I got 947.1 meters and in the second I got 1004.5, so I was
pretty confident I could beat the 928.5 meters on the official attempt (though
I was still pretty nervous). I also trained by doing a small number of
approximately 1/2 or 1/3 sized practices (maybe three or so), and more regular
shorter runs (1-10 climbs) at fast pace.

A Kindle Fire running a pre-release version of my [Giant
Stopwatch](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=omegacentauri.mobi.simplestopwatch&hl=en_US&gl=US)
app provided unofficial timing for audience to see and for my pacing. I had to
modify the app to have a periodic beep to meet Guinness's requirements of an
audible stop signal.

I climbed in sets of 10. The planned pace was 8:18 per set and a 44-45 second
rest between sets (clock runs during rests,), averaging at 49.8 seconds per
climb including descent. I was always ahead of pace, and I occasionally took a
mini break at the mid-point time if I was too far ahead.

On the ground there was a sheet of paper with the start and end times of each
break printed in large letters (calculated by [this
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/10e364904dfcc19b043a594232e0acde)), as
well as the mid-point time for each set of 10 to keep me better on pace.

The top of the wall is 15.13 meters vertically from the ground (as measured by
a geology grad student), at 3.5 degree slab.

In the morning I stress-baked pumpkin muffins for myself and the volunteers. I
had the muffins, water and loose chalk on a table for use during breaks.

I wore moderately worn (one small hole) and comfortable 5.10 Anasazi shoes, a
Camp USA Energy harness, shorts and a T-shirt. (I have not received any
sponsorship.) My belayer used a tube-style device and wore belay gloves.

I’ve been wondering whether it is possible for a country to count as pacifist
and yet wage a defensive war. I think the answer is positive, as long as one
has a moderate pacifism that is opposed to lethal violence but not to all
violence. I think that a prohibition of all violence is untenable. It seems
obvious that if you see someone about to shoot an innocent person, and you can
give the shooter a shove to make them miss, you presumptively should.

First, we have “officially” non-lethal weapons: tasers, gas, etc. Some of
these might violate current international law, but it seems that a pacifist
country could modify its commitment to some accords.

Second, “lethal” weapons can be used less than lethally. For instance, with
modern medicine, abdominal gunshot wounds are only 10% fatal, yet they are no
doubt very effective at stopping an attacker. While it may seem weird to
imagine a pacifist shooting someone in the stomach, when the chance of
survival is 90%, it does not seem unreasonable to say that the pacifist could
be aiming to stop the attacker non-lethally. After all, tasers sometimes kill,
too. They do so less than 0.25% of the time, but that’s a difference of degree
rather than of principle.

Third, we might subdivide moderate pacifists based on whether they prohibit
all violence that foreseeably leads to death or just violence that
intentionally leads to death. If it is only intentionally lethal violence that
is forbidden, then quite a bit of modern warfare can stand. If the enemy is
attacking with tanks or planes, one can intentionally destroy the tank or
plane as a weapon, while only foreseeing, without intending, the death of the
crew. (I don’t know how far one can take this line without sophistry. Can one
drop a bomb on an infantry unit intending to smash up their rifles without
intending to kill the soldiers?) Similarly, one can bomb enemy weapons
factories.

Whether such a limited way of waging war could be successful probably depends
on the case. If one combined the non-lethal (or not intentionally lethal)
means with technological and numerical superiority, it wouldn’t be surprising
to me if one could win.

So maybe our choice is between tasing a million, thereby non-intentionally
killing 250 soldiers, and intentionally killing one general. It seems to me
that (2) is morally preferable, even though our moderate pacifist has to allow
(1) and forbid (2).

Alex  
  
Doesn't you post here entail that we should murder Putin?

Now, imagine that one person is attacking you and nine other innocents, with
the intent of killing the ten of you, and you can stop them with a taser.
Surely you should, and surely the moderate pacifist will say that this is an
appropriate use case for the taser.

These may seem to be consequentialist arguments. I don't think so. I don't
have the same intuitions if we replace the general by the general's innocent
child in (2) and (4), even if killing the child were to stop the war (e.g., by
making the general afraid that their other children would be murdered).

If you can tase one person to stop the murder of ten, then (1) should be
permissible if it’s the only option. But tasers occasionally kill people. We
don’t know how often. Apparently it’s [less than 1 in
400](https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/investigations/2021/04/23/police-
use-tasers-ends-hundreds-deaths-like-daunte-wright/7221153002/) uses. Suppose
it’s 1 in 4000. Then option (1) results in 250 enemy deaths.

Note that a version of this argument goes through even if the moderate
pacifist backs up and says that tasers are too lethal. For suppose instead of
tasers we have drones that destroy the dominant hand of an enemy soldier while
guaranteeing survival (with science fictional medical technology). It’s
clearly right to release such a drone on a soldier who is about to kill ten
innocents. But now compare:

Alex  
  
Of course one should never murder anyone, but the question is: would killing
Putin be murder?

Imagine a moderate pacifist who rejects lethal self-defense, but allows non-
lethal self-defense when appropriate, say by use of tasers.

Very well. Now consider this on a national level. Suppose there are a million
enemy soldiers ordered to commit genocide against ten million, and you have
two ways to stop them:

I think (4) is still morally preferable to causing the kind of disruption to
the lives of a million people that plan (3) would involve.

One should never murder anyone. Killing, on the other hand, can sometimes be
justified.  
  
One question about killing the leader of an invading country is whether the
leader counts as a civilian, since the killing of civilians is forbidden by
the Geneva Convention. There is also some worry about the Geneva Convention's
killing by "perfidy", which is taken to rule out at least some assassinations.
So, as a matter of positive international law, it seems a difficult question.  
  
Were there no international law on the matter, I wouldn't see a significant
difference between killing a political leader and killing a general, if both
are giving orders to fight. Morally speaking, but not necessarily in
international law, both seem to me to be equally combatants.  
  
Besides the moral and legal questions, there is also a prudential question. In
my post I assumed that killing the general would stop the invasion. I got to
assume that because I was making up the case. Whether in actual fact killing a
leader would stop an invasion is less clear. Indeed such a thing might be seen
as such a serious attack on the country that the retaliation might be really
horrific.

In the morning I stress-baked pumpkin muffins for myself and the volunteers. I
had the muffins, water and loose chalk on a table for use during breaks.

I wore moderately worn (one small hole) and comfortable 5.10 Anasazi shoes, a
Camp USA Energy harness, shorts and a T-shirt. (I have not received any
sponsorship.) My belayer used a tube-style device and wore belay gloves.

The route was a standard 5.7 grade for most of my training (including when I
unofficially beat the records), with Rock management kindly agreeing to keep
the route up for several months for me. For the final attempt, we added holds
to make the finish at the top of the wall, and changed three other holds to
easier ones. (Guinness has no route grade requirements.)

Most of my practice was with an auto-belay, and at a shorter distance per
climb (and hence greater number of climbs needed) since the auto-belay makes
it impossible to get to the top of the wall. The auto-belay is also spring
loaded so it effectively decreases body weight (by 7 lbs at the bottom
according to my measurement). Then a couple of weeks ago the auto-belay was
closed by management due to a maintenance issue, and I had a break in training
until the Wednesday before the official attempt when I trained with a manual
belay.

You should make a living out of that, Alex.  
Would give you a lot less stress.

I trained for about three months, not very heavily. In training did two
unofficial full-length practice runs, and in each I beat the previous record:
in the first one I got 947.1 meters and in the second I got 1004.5, so I was
pretty confident I could beat the 928.5 meters on the official attempt (though
I was still pretty nervous). I also trained by doing a small number of
approximately 1/2 or 1/3 sized practices (maybe three or so), and more regular
shorter runs (1-10 climbs) at fast pace.

The top of the wall is 15.13 meters vertically from the ground (as measured by
a geology grad student), at 3.5 degree slab.

On the ground there was a sheet of paper with the start and end times of each
break printed in large letters (calculated by [this
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/10e364904dfcc19b043a594232e0acde)), as
well as the mid-point time for each set of 10 to keep me better on pace.

A Kindle Fire running a pre-release version of my [Giant
Stopwatch](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=omegacentauri.mobi.simplestopwatch&hl=en_US&gl=US)
app provided unofficial timing for audience to see and for my pacing. I had to
modify the app to have a periodic beep to meet Guinness's requirements of an
audible stop signal.

I was actually really stressed yesterday. I had already beaten the record
unofficially in practice, but with lots of people coming to watch (local
climbers, grad students and colleagues), I didn't want to disappoint.
Contributing to the stress was that the conditions changed from my practice
runs (the auto-belay was down from maintenance and I had to use a manual
belay; this involved lengthening the route slightly, increasing the length of
each set and decreasing the total count, as well as an effective increase in
my weight since the auto-belay subtracts a few pounds due to its spring-
loading), and that I hadn't been able to train on the particular route for
several weeks prior to Wednesday due to the auto-belay being down for
maintenance while on Wednesday's approximately half-distance-at-half-time
practice I was more tired at the end than I should have been due to poor
pacing.

And now for something not very philosophical. Today, in front of two witnesses
and two timekeepers and with the help of Levi Durham doing an amazing feat of
belaying me for an hour, I beat the [Guinness World
Record](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/438677-greatest-
vertical-distance-climbed-on-an-artificial-climbing-wall-in-1-hour-indi) in
greatest vertical distance climbed in one hour on an indoor climbing wall. The
previous record was 928.5m and I did 1013.7m (with about half a minute to
spare). On Baylor's climbing wall, this involved 67 climbs divided into sets
of 10 (the last was 7), with about a minute of rest between sets (the clock
kept on running during the rest).

About half-way through, I ducked into the storage area inside the rock and
changed to a dry shirt.

I climbed in sets of 10. The planned pace was 8:18 per set and a 44-45 second
rest between sets (clock runs during rests,), averaging at 49.8 seconds per
climb including descent. I was always ahead of pace, and I occasionally took a
mini break at the mid-point time if I was too far ahead.

Since Guinness requires video proof in addition to human witnesses, in the
interests of redundancy, I had three cameras pointed at the attempt. The best
footage (above) is from a Sony A7R2 with a zoom lens at 16mm, producing 1080P
at 59.94 fps. Video was processed with Adobe Premiere Rush. The processing
consisted of trimming the start and end, and adding a timing video track I
generated with a [Python OpenCV2
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/3a705c859d4ea4a482c4e47e96a08f79),
synchronized with single-frame precision at the 1:00:00 point with the footage
of Giant Stopwatch (barely visible under the table towards the end of the
video; early in the video, glare hides it). For the unofficial version I link
above, I accelerated the middle climbs 10X in Premiere Rush.

I’ve been wondering whether it is possible for a country to count as pacifist
and yet wage a defensive war. I think the answer is positive, as long as one
has a moderate pacifism that is opposed to lethal violence but not to all
violence. I think that a prohibition of all violence is untenable. It seems
obvious that if you see someone about to shoot an innocent person, and you can
give the shooter a shove to make them miss, you presumptively should.

Third, we might subdivide moderate pacifists based on whether they prohibit
all violence that foreseeably leads to death or just violence that
intentionally leads to death. If it is only intentionally lethal violence that
is forbidden, then quite a bit of modern warfare can stand. If the enemy is
attacking with tanks or planes, one can intentionally destroy the tank or
plane as a weapon, while only foreseeing, without intending, the death of the
crew. (I don’t know how far one can take this line without sophistry. Can one
drop a bomb on an infantry unit intending to smash up their rifles without
intending to kill the soldiers?) Similarly, one can bomb enemy weapons
factories.

Whether such a limited way of waging war could be successful probably depends
on the case. If one combined the non-lethal (or not intentionally lethal)
means with technological and numerical superiority, it wouldn’t be surprising
to me if one could win.

Second, “lethal” weapons can be used less than lethally. For instance, with
modern medicine, abdominal gunshot wounds are only 10% fatal, yet they are no
doubt very effective at stopping an attacker. While it may seem weird to
imagine a pacifist shooting someone in the stomach, when the chance of
survival is 90%, it does not seem unreasonable to say that the pacifist could
be aiming to stop the attacker non-lethally. After all, tasers sometimes kill,
too. They do so less than 0.25% of the time, but that’s a difference of degree
rather than of principle.

First, we have “officially” non-lethal weapons: tasers, gas, etc. Some of
these might violate current international law, but it seems that a pacifist
country could modify its commitment to some accords.

If you can tase one person to stop the murder of ten, then (1) should be
permissible if it’s the only option. But tasers occasionally kill people. We
don’t know how often. Apparently it’s [less than 1 in
400](https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/investigations/2021/04/23/police-
use-tasers-ends-hundreds-deaths-like-daunte-wright/7221153002/) uses. Suppose
it’s 1 in 4000. Then option (1) results in 250 enemy deaths.

Alex  
  
Doesn't you post here entail that we should murder Putin?

Now, imagine that one person is attacking you and nine other innocents, with
the intent of killing the ten of you, and you can stop them with a taser.
Surely you should, and surely the moderate pacifist will say that this is an
appropriate use case for the taser.

Note that a version of this argument goes through even if the moderate
pacifist backs up and says that tasers are too lethal. For suppose instead of
tasers we have drones that destroy the dominant hand of an enemy soldier while
guaranteeing survival (with science fictional medical technology). It’s
clearly right to release such a drone on a soldier who is about to kill ten
innocents. But now compare:

One should never murder anyone. Killing, on the other hand, can sometimes be
justified.  
  
One question about killing the leader of an invading country is whether the
leader counts as a civilian, since the killing of civilians is forbidden by
the Geneva Convention. There is also some worry about the Geneva Convention's
killing by "perfidy", which is taken to rule out at least some assassinations.
So, as a matter of positive international law, it seems a difficult question.  
  
Were there no international law on the matter, I wouldn't see a significant
difference between killing a political leader and killing a general, if both
are giving orders to fight. Morally speaking, but not necessarily in
international law, both seem to me to be equally combatants.  
  
Besides the moral and legal questions, there is also a prudential question. In
my post I assumed that killing the general would stop the invasion. I got to
assume that because I was making up the case. Whether in actual fact killing a
leader would stop an invasion is less clear. Indeed such a thing might be seen
as such a serious attack on the country that the retaliation might be really
horrific.

These may seem to be consequentialist arguments. I don't think so. I don't
have the same intuitions if we replace the general by the general's innocent
child in (2) and (4), even if killing the child were to stop the war (e.g., by
making the general afraid that their other children would be murdered).

Alex  
  
Of course one should never murder anyone, but the question is: would killing
Putin be murder?

Very well. Now consider this on a national level. Suppose there are a million
enemy soldiers ordered to commit genocide against ten million, and you have
two ways to stop them:

I think (4) is still morally preferable to causing the kind of disruption to
the lives of a million people that plan (3) would involve.

So maybe our choice is between tasing a million, thereby non-intentionally
killing 250 soldiers, and intentionally killing one general. It seems to me
that (2) is morally preferable, even though our moderate pacifist has to allow
(1) and forbid (2).

Imagine a moderate pacifist who rejects lethal self-defense, but allows non-
lethal self-defense when appropriate, say by use of tasers.

Maybe the answer to both questions is that I could, but only metaphysically
and not causally. In other words, it could be that the laws of nature, or of
human nature, make it impossible for me to exercise one of the powers without
the other, just as I cannot wiggle my ring finger without wiggling my middle
finger as well. On this view, if there is a God, he could cause me to acquire
promissory-type obligations without my promising, and he could let me engage
in the natural act of promising while blocking the exercise of normative power
and leaving me normatively unbound. This doesn’t seem particularly
problematic.

A normative power is a power to change a normative condition.
[Raz](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/230182259.pdf) says the change is not
produced “causally” but “normatively”.

Here is a picture on which this is correct. We exercise a normative power by
exercising a natural power in such a context that the successful exercise of
the natural power is partly constitutive of a normative fact. For instance, we
utter a promise, thereby exercising a natural power to engage in a certain
kind of speech act, and our exercise of that speech act is partly constitutive
of, rather than causal of, the state of affairs of our being obligated to
carry out the promised action.

There are two versions of the above model. On one version, there is an
underlying fundamental conditional normative fact _C_ , such as that if I have
promised something then I should do it, and my exercise of normative power
supplies the antecedent _A_ of that conditional, and then the normative
consequent of _C_ comes to be grounded in _C_ and _A_. On another version,
there there are some natural acts that are directly constitutive of a
normative state of affairs, not merely by supplying the antecedent of a
conditional normative fact. I think the first version of the model is the more
plausible in paradigmatic cases.

Perhaps the real problem for a lot of people with a causal view of normative
powers is that it tends to lead to a violation of supervenience. For if it is
metaphysically possble to have the exercise of the normative power without the
exercise of the natural power, or vice versa, then it seems we don’t have
supervenience of the normative on the non-normative. But supervenience does
not seem to me to be inescapable.

But why not allow for a causal model? Why not suppose that a normative power
is a causal power to make an irreducible normative property come to be
instantiated in someone? Thus, my power to promise is the power to cause
myself to be obligated to do what I have promised.

I think the difficulty with a causal model is the fact that in paradigm cases
of normative power, there is a natural power that _is_ being exercised, and we
have the intuition that the exercise of the natural power is necessary and
sufficient for the normative effect. But on a causal model, why couldn’t I
cause a promissory-type obligation without promising, simply causing the
relevant property of being obligated to come to be instantiated in me? And why
couldn’t I engage in the speech act while yet remaining normatively unbound,
because my normative power wasn’t exercised in parallel with the natural
power?

But perhaps we can say this. We have a normative power to endow some neutral
things with value by making them our ends. And in fact the only way to act for
an end that does not have any independent value is by exercising that
normative power. And exercising that normative power involves your seeing the
thing you’re endowing with value as valuable. And maybe the only way to raise
your arm or for Bob to bake the cake in the examples is by exercising the
normative power, and doing so involves seeing the end as good. Maybe. This has
some phenomenological plausibility and it would be nice if it were true,
because the strong guise of the good thesis is pretty plausible to me.

This isn’t quite enough for a defense of the strong thesis. For even if the
success is good, it does not follow that you perceive the success as good. You
might subscribe to an axiological theory on which success is not good in
general, but only success at something good.

For the strong version to have any plausibility, “good” must include cases of
purely instrumental goodness.

**Strong** : Whenever you act, you act for an end, and every end you act for
you perceive as good.

In both cases, it is still true that the agent acts for a good end—the useful
triggering of the device and the production of the cake. But in both cases it
seems they are also acting for a worthless end. Thus the cases seem to fit
with the weak but not the strong guise of the good thesis.

**Case 1:** There is some device which does something useful when you trigger
it. It is triggered by electrical activity. You strap it on to your arm, and
raise your arm, so that the electrical activity in your muscles triggers the
device. Your raising your arm has the arm going up as an end, but that end is
not perceived as good, but merely neutral. All you care about is the
electrical activity in your muscles.

I was going to leave it at this. But then I thought of a way to save the
strong guise of the good thesis. Success is valuable as such. When I try to do
something, succeeding at it has value. So the arm going up or the cake being
produced _are_ valuable as necessary parts of the success of one’s action. So
perhaps every end of your action _is_ trivially good, because it is good for
your action to succeed, and the end is a (constitutive, not causal) means to
success.

**Case 2:** Back when they were dating in high school, Bob promised to try his
best to bake a nine-layer chocolate cake for Alice’s 40th birthday. Since
then, Bob and Alice have had a falling out, and hate each other’s guts.
Moreover, Alice and all her guests hate chocolate. But Alice doesn’t release
Bob from his promise. Bob tries his best to bake the cake in order to fulfill
his promise, and happens to succeed. In trying to bake the cake, Bob acted for
the end of producing a cake. But producing the cake was worthless, since no
one would eat it. The only value was in the trying, since that was the
fulfillment of his promise.

**Weak** : Whenever you act, you act for an end that you perceive is good.

I think there is still reason to be sceptical of the strong version.

According to the guise of the good thesis, one always acts for the sake of an
apparent good. There is a weaker and a stronger version of this:

Suppose Alice can read your mind, and you are playing poker against a set of
people not including Alice. You don’t care about winning, just about money.
Alice has a deal for you that you can’t refuse.

Here is the oddity: you are trying to win in order to get paid, but you only
get paid if you don’t win. Thus, you are trying to achieve something, the
achievement of which would undercut the end you are pursuing.

Is this possible? I think so. We just need to
[distinguish](http://alexanderpruss.blogspot.com/2019/08/two-ways-to-pursue-y-
for-sake-of-z.html) between pursuing victory for the sake of something else
that follows from victory and pursuing victory for the sake of something that
might follow from the pursuit of victory.

If you lose, but you tried to win, she pays you double what you lost.

Clearly the prudent thing to do is to try to win. For if you don’t try to win,
then you are guaranteed not to get any money. But if you do try, you won’t
lose anything, and you might gain.

I trained for about three months, not very heavily. In training did two
unofficial full-length practice runs, and in each I beat the previous record:
in the first one I got 947.1 meters and in the second I got 1004.5, so I was
pretty confident I could beat the 928.5 meters on the official attempt (though
I was still pretty nervous). I also trained by doing a small number of
approximately 1/2 or 1/3 sized practices (maybe three or so), and more regular
shorter runs (1-10 climbs) at fast pace.

Since Guinness requires video proof in addition to human witnesses, in the
interests of redundancy, I had three cameras pointed at the attempt. The best
footage (above) is from a Sony A7R2 with a zoom lens at 16mm, producing 1080P
at 59.94 fps. Video was processed with Adobe Premiere Rush. The processing
consisted of trimming the start and end, and adding a timing video track I
generated with a [Python OpenCV2
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/3a705c859d4ea4a482c4e47e96a08f79),
synchronized with single-frame precision at the 1:00:00 point with the footage
of Giant Stopwatch (barely visible under the table towards the end of the
video; early in the video, glare hides it). For the unofficial version I link
above, I accelerated the middle climbs 10X in Premiere Rush.

I was actually really stressed yesterday. I had already beaten the record
unofficially in practice, but with lots of people coming to watch (local
climbers, grad students and colleagues), I didn't want to disappoint.
Contributing to the stress was that the conditions changed from my practice
runs (the auto-belay was down from maintenance and I had to use a manual
belay; this involved lengthening the route slightly, increasing the length of
each set and decreasing the total count, as well as an effective increase in
my weight since the auto-belay subtracts a few pounds due to its spring-
loading), and that I hadn't been able to train on the particular route for
several weeks prior to Wednesday due to the auto-belay being down for
maintenance while on Wednesday's approximately half-distance-at-half-time
practice I was more tired at the end than I should have been due to poor
pacing.

I wore moderately worn (one small hole) and comfortable 5.10 Anasazi shoes, a
Camp USA Energy harness, shorts and a T-shirt. (I have not received any
sponsorship.) My belayer used a tube-style device and wore belay gloves.

In the morning I stress-baked pumpkin muffins for myself and the volunteers. I
had the muffins, water and loose chalk on a table for use during breaks.

You should make a living out of that, Alex.  
Would give you a lot less stress.

I climbed in sets of 10. The planned pace was 8:18 per set and a 44-45 second
rest between sets (clock runs during rests,), averaging at 49.8 seconds per
climb including descent. I was always ahead of pace, and I occasionally took a
mini break at the mid-point time if I was too far ahead.

The top of the wall is 15.13 meters vertically from the ground (as measured by
a geology grad student), at 3.5 degree slab.

And now for something not very philosophical. Today, in front of two witnesses
and two timekeepers and with the help of Levi Durham doing an amazing feat of
belaying me for an hour, I beat the [Guinness World
Record](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/438677-greatest-
vertical-distance-climbed-on-an-artificial-climbing-wall-in-1-hour-indi) in
greatest vertical distance climbed in one hour on an indoor climbing wall. The
previous record was 928.5m and I did 1013.7m (with about half a minute to
spare). On Baylor's climbing wall, this involved 67 climbs divided into sets
of 10 (the last was 7), with about a minute of rest between sets (the clock
kept on running during the rest).

On the ground there was a sheet of paper with the start and end times of each
break printed in large letters (calculated by [this
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/10e364904dfcc19b043a594232e0acde)), as
well as the mid-point time for each set of 10 to keep me better on pace.

Most of my practice was with an auto-belay, and at a shorter distance per
climb (and hence greater number of climbs needed) since the auto-belay makes
it impossible to get to the top of the wall. The auto-belay is also spring
loaded so it effectively decreases body weight (by 7 lbs at the bottom
according to my measurement). Then a couple of weeks ago the auto-belay was
closed by management due to a maintenance issue, and I had a break in training
until the Wednesday before the official attempt when I trained with a manual
belay.

A Kindle Fire running a pre-release version of my [Giant
Stopwatch](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=omegacentauri.mobi.simplestopwatch&hl=en_US&gl=US)
app provided unofficial timing for audience to see and for my pacing. I had to
modify the app to have a periodic beep to meet Guinness's requirements of an
audible stop signal.

About half-way through, I ducked into the storage area inside the rock and
changed to a dry shirt.

The route was a standard 5.7 grade for most of my training (including when I
unofficially beat the records), with Rock management kindly agreeing to keep
the route up for several months for me. For the final attempt, we added holds
to make the finish at the top of the wall, and changed three other holds to
easier ones. (Guinness has no route grade requirements.)

I’ve been wondering whether it is possible for a country to count as pacifist
and yet wage a defensive war. I think the answer is positive, as long as one
has a moderate pacifism that is opposed to lethal violence but not to all
violence. I think that a prohibition of all violence is untenable. It seems
obvious that if you see someone about to shoot an innocent person, and you can
give the shooter a shove to make them miss, you presumptively should.

Whether such a limited way of waging war could be successful probably depends
on the case. If one combined the non-lethal (or not intentionally lethal)
means with technological and numerical superiority, it wouldn’t be surprising
to me if one could win.

First, we have “officially” non-lethal weapons: tasers, gas, etc. Some of
these might violate current international law, but it seems that a pacifist
country could modify its commitment to some accords.

Second, “lethal” weapons can be used less than lethally. For instance, with
modern medicine, abdominal gunshot wounds are only 10% fatal, yet they are no
doubt very effective at stopping an attacker. While it may seem weird to
imagine a pacifist shooting someone in the stomach, when the chance of
survival is 90%, it does not seem unreasonable to say that the pacifist could
be aiming to stop the attacker non-lethally. After all, tasers sometimes kill,
too. They do so less than 0.25% of the time, but that’s a difference of degree
rather than of principle.

Third, we might subdivide moderate pacifists based on whether they prohibit
all violence that foreseeably leads to death or just violence that
intentionally leads to death. If it is only intentionally lethal violence that
is forbidden, then quite a bit of modern warfare can stand. If the enemy is
attacking with tanks or planes, one can intentionally destroy the tank or
plane as a weapon, while only foreseeing, without intending, the death of the
crew. (I don’t know how far one can take this line without sophistry. Can one
drop a bomb on an infantry unit intending to smash up their rifles without
intending to kill the soldiers?) Similarly, one can bomb enemy weapons
factories.

Since Guinness requires video proof in addition to human witnesses, in the
interests of redundancy, I had three cameras pointed at the attempt. The best
footage (above) is from a Sony A7R2 with a zoom lens at 16mm, producing 1080P
at 59.94 fps. Video was processed with Adobe Premiere Rush. The processing
consisted of trimming the start and end, and adding a timing video track I
generated with a [Python OpenCV2
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/3a705c859d4ea4a482c4e47e96a08f79),
synchronized with single-frame precision at the 1:00:00 point with the footage
of Giant Stopwatch (barely visible under the table towards the end of the
video; early in the video, glare hides it). For the unofficial version I link
above, I accelerated the middle climbs 10X in Premiere Rush.

Most of my practice was with an auto-belay, and at a shorter distance per
climb (and hence greater number of climbs needed) since the auto-belay makes
it impossible to get to the top of the wall. The auto-belay is also spring
loaded so it effectively decreases body weight (by 7 lbs at the bottom
according to my measurement). Then a couple of weeks ago the auto-belay was
closed by management due to a maintenance issue, and I had a break in training
until the Wednesday before the official attempt when I trained with a manual
belay.

About half-way through, I ducked into the storage area inside the rock and
changed to a dry shirt.

I climbed in sets of 10. The planned pace was 8:18 per set and a 44-45 second
rest between sets (clock runs during rests,), averaging at 49.8 seconds per
climb including descent. I was always ahead of pace, and I occasionally took a
mini break at the mid-point time if I was too far ahead.

A Kindle Fire running a pre-release version of my [Giant
Stopwatch](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=omegacentauri.mobi.simplestopwatch&hl=en_US&gl=US)
app provided unofficial timing for audience to see and for my pacing. I had to
modify the app to have a periodic beep to meet Guinness's requirements of an
audible stop signal.

You should make a living out of that, Alex.  
Would give you a lot less stress.

On the ground there was a sheet of paper with the start and end times of each
break printed in large letters (calculated by [this
script](https://gist.github.com/arpruss/10e364904dfcc19b043a594232e0acde)), as
well as the mid-point time for each set of 10 to keep me better on pace.

I trained for about three months, not very heavily. In training did two
unofficial full-length practice runs, and in each I beat the previous record:
in the first one I got 947.1 meters and in the second I got 1004.5, so I was
pretty confident I could beat the 928.5 meters on the official attempt (though
I was still pretty nervous). I also trained by doing a small number of
approximately 1/2 or 1/3 sized practices (maybe three or so), and more regular
shorter runs (1-10 climbs) at fast pace.

The top of the wall is 15.13 meters vertically from the ground (as measured by
a geology grad student), at 3.5 degree slab.

I was actually really stressed yesterday. I had already beaten the record
unofficially in practice, but with lots of people coming to watch (local
climbers, grad students and colleagues), I didn't want to disappoint.
Contributing to the stress was that the conditions changed from my practice
runs (the auto-belay was down from maintenance and I had to use a manual
belay; this involved lengthening the route slightly, increasing the length of
each set and decreasing the total count, as well as an effective increase in
my weight since the auto-belay subtracts a few pounds due to its spring-
loading), and that I hadn't been able to train on the particular route for
several weeks prior to Wednesday due to the auto-belay being down for
maintenance while on Wednesday's approximately half-distance-at-half-time
practice I was more tired at the end than I should have been due to poor
pacing.

And now for something not very philosophical. Today, in front of two witnesses
and two timekeepers and with the help of Levi Durham doing an amazing feat of
belaying me for an hour, I beat the [Guinness World
Record](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/438677-greatest-
vertical-distance-climbed-on-an-artificial-climbing-wall-in-1-hour-indi) in
greatest vertical distance climbed in one hour on an indoor climbing wall. The
previous record was 928.5m and I did 1013.7m (with about half a minute to
spare). On Baylor's climbing wall, this involved 67 climbs divided into sets
of 10 (the last was 7), with about a minute of rest between sets (the clock
kept on running during the rest).

I wore moderately worn (one small hole) and comfortable 5.10 Anasazi shoes, a
Camp USA Energy harness, shorts and a T-shirt. (I have not received any
sponsorship.) My belayer used a tube-style device and wore belay gloves.

The route was a standard 5.7 grade for most of my training (including when I
unofficially beat the records), with Rock management kindly agreeing to keep
the route up for several months for me. For the final attempt, we added holds
to make the finish at the top of the wall, and changed three other holds to
easier ones. (Guinness has no route grade requirements.)

In the morning I stress-baked pumpkin muffins for myself and the volunteers. I
had the muffins, water and loose chalk on a table for use during breaks.

Second, “lethal” weapons can be used less than lethally. For instance, with
modern medicine, abdominal gunshot wounds are only 10% fatal, yet they are no
doubt very effective at stopping an attacker. While it may seem weird to
imagine a pacifist shooting someone in the stomach, when the chance of
survival is 90%, it does not seem unreasonable to say that the pacifist could
be aiming to stop the attacker non-lethally. After all, tasers sometimes kill,
too. They do so less than 0.25% of the time, but that’s a difference of degree
rather than of principle.

Third, we might subdivide moderate pacifists based on whether they prohibit
all violence that foreseeably leads to death or just violence that
intentionally leads to death. If it is only intentionally lethal violence that
is forbidden, then quite a bit of modern warfare can stand. If the enemy is
attacking with tanks or planes, one can intentionally destroy the tank or
plane as a weapon, while only foreseeing, without intending, the death of the
crew. (I don’t know how far one can take this line without sophistry. Can one
drop a bomb on an infantry unit intending to smash up their rifles without
intending to kill the soldiers?) Similarly, one can bomb enemy weapons
factories.

First, we have “officially” non-lethal weapons: tasers, gas, etc. Some of
these might violate current international law, but it seems that a pacifist
country could modify its commitment to some accords.

I’ve been wondering whether it is possible for a country to count as pacifist
and yet wage a defensive war. I think the answer is positive, as long as one
has a moderate pacifism that is opposed to lethal violence but not to all
violence. I think that a prohibition of all violence is untenable. It seems
obvious that if you see someone about to shoot an innocent person, and you can
give the shooter a shove to make them miss, you presumptively should.

Whether such a limited way of waging war could be successful probably depends
on the case. If one combined the non-lethal (or not intentionally lethal)
means with technological and numerical superiority, it wouldn’t be surprising
to me if one could win.

The promise is simply irrelevant here. It is true that in normal
circumstances, it makes sense for egoists to keep promises in order to fool
people into thinking that they have morality. But I’ve assumed full shared
knowledge of each other’s tendencies here, and so no such considerations apply
here.

What if they are utilitarians? It makes no difference. Since in this case both
always get the same outcome, there is no difference between utilitarians and
amoral egoists.

This means that in cases like this, with full transparency of behavioral
tendencies, utilitarians and amoral egoists will do well to brainwash or
hypnotize themselves into promise-keeping.

It is true that if Alice expects Bob to expect her to keep her promise, then
Alice will expect Bob to raise his right hand, and hence she should raise her
right hand. But since she’s known to be an amoral egoist, there is no reason
for Bob to expect Alice to keep her promise. And the same vice versa.

Take first the case where they are both perfect amoral egoists. Amoral egoists
don’t care about promises. So the fact that an amoral egoist promised to raise
the right hand is no evidence at all that they will raise the right hand,
unless there is something in it for them. But is there anything in it for
them? Well, if Bob raises his right hand, then there is something in it for
Alice to raise her right hand. But note that this conditional is true
_regardless_ of whether they’ve made any promises to each other, and it is
equally true that if Bob raises his left hand, then there is something in it
for Alice to raise her left hand.

Suppose Alice and Bob are perfect utilitarians or perfect amoral egoists in
any combination. They are about to play a game where they raise a left hand or
a right hand in a separate booth, and if they both raise the same hand, they
both get something good. Otherwise, nobody gets that good. Nobody sees what
they’re doing in the game: the game is fully automated. And they both have
full shared knowledge of the above.

In ordinary life, this problem doesn’t arise as much, because as long as at
least one person is more typical, and hence takes promises to have reason-
giving force, or if public opinion is around to enforce promise-keeping, then
the issue doesn’t come up. But I think there is a lesson here and in the
[previous post](http://alexanderpruss.blogspot.com/2022/12/utilitarianism-and-
communication.html): for many ordinary practice, the utilitarian is free-
riding on the non-utilitarians.

They confer before the game and promise to one another to raise the right
hand. They go into their separate rooms. And what happens next?

Suppose the lion is on the left path. What should Alice do? Well, if she can,
she should bring it about that Bob takes the right path, because doing so
would clearly maximize utility. How can she do that? An obvious suggestion:
Engage in a conventional behavior indicating a where the lion is, such as
pointing left and roaring, or saying “Hail well-met traveler, lest you be
eaten, I advise you to avoid the leftward leonine path.”

Alice and Bob are both perfect Bayesian epistemic agents and subjectively
perfect utilitarians (i.e., they always do what by their lights maximizes
expected utility). Bob is going to Megara. He comes to a crossroads, from
which two different paths lead to Megara. On exactly one of these paths there
is a man-eating lion and on the other there is nothing special. Alice knows
which path has the lion. The above is all shared knowledge for Alice and Bob.

But I’ve been trying really hard to figure out how is it that such a
conventional behavior would indicate to Bob that the lion is on the left path.

I put this as an issue about communication. But maybe it’s really an issue
about communication but coordination. Maybe the literature on repeated games
might help in some way.

This is not a refutation of utilitarianism. Utilitarians, following Parfit,
are willing to admit that there could be utility maximization reasons to cease
to be utilitarian. But it is, nonetheless, really interesting if something as
fundamental as communication provides such a reason.

Here is a brief way to put it. For Alice and Bob, convention carries no weight
except as a predictor of the behavior of convention-bound people, i.e., people
who are not subjectively perfect utilitarians. It is shared knowledge between
Alice and Bob that neither is convention-bound. So convention is irrelevant to
the problem at hand, the problem of getting Bob to avoid the lion. But there
is no solution to the problem absent convention or some other tool unavailable
to the utilitarian (a natural law theorist might claim that mimicry and
pointing are _natural_ indicators).

If the above argument is correct—and I am far from confident of that, since it
makes my head spin—then we have an argument that in order for communication to
be possible, at least one of the agents must be convention-bound. One way to
be convention-bound is to think, in a way utilitarians don’t, that convention
provides non-consequentialist reasons. Another way is to be an akratic
utilitarian, addicted to following convention. Now, the possibility of
communication is essential for the utility of the kinds of social animals that
we are. Thus we have an argument that at least some subjective utilitarians
will have to become convention-bound, either by getting themselves to believe
that convention has normative force or by being akratic.

If Alice were a typical human being, she would have a habit of using
established social conventions to tell the truth about things, except perhaps
in exceptional cases (such as the murderer at the door), and so her use of the
conventional lion-indicating behavior would correlate with the presence of
lions, and would provide Bob with evidence of the presence of lions. But Alice
is not a typical human being. She is a subjectively perfect utilitarian.
Social convention has no normative force for Alice (or Bob, for that matter).
Only utility does.

Similarly, if Bob were a typical human being, he would have a habit of forming
his beliefs on the basis of testimony interpreted via established social
conventions absent reason to think one is being misinformed, and so Alice’s
engaging in conventional left-path lion-indicating behavior would lead Bob to
think there is a lion on the left, and hence to go on the right. And while it
woudl still be true that social convention has no normative force for Alice,
Alice would think have reason to think that Bob follows convention, and for
the sake of maximizing utility would suit her behavior to his. But Bob is a
perfect Bayesian. He doesn’t form beliefs out of habit. He updates on
evidence. And given that Alice is not a typical human being, but a
subjectively perfect utilitarian, it is unclear to me why her engaging in the
conventional left-path lion-indicating behavior is more evidence for the lion
being on the left than for the lion being on the right. For Bob knows that
convention carries no normative force for Alice.

I do have a piece of anecdotal data, though. I’ve been doing some endurance-
ish sports. Nothing nearly like a marathon, but things like swimming 2-3 km,
or climbing for an hour, typically (but [not
always](http://alexanderpruss.blogspot.com/2022/12/a-new-but-uncertified-
world-record.html)) competing against myself.

BTW, it may depend on how much one keeps to proper form in the different
racquet sports. Someone like me who plays lots of different racquet sports
(regularly: badminton; semi-regularly: tennis, racquetball, table tennis,
pickleball; used to do occasional squash until our university's one court
closed as nobody but my son and I played; used to do crossminton during
Covid), maybe at an upper beginner level, perhaps does not have enough good
form in any one of the sports for it to matter. I hadn't played much tennis
this fall, but I played a fair amount of badminton, and seemed to find my
tennis improved when I got back to it, maybe due to transfer of thinking about
things like "how do I hit the shuttle away from where my opponents are", or
maybe just due to general fitness improvement.

This is akin to the 'positive transfer' of skills, as discussed with the sport
science. So-called 'negative transfer', its opposite, is to be avoided at all
costs. For example, if I try to play squash to improve my racket skills, I
will ruin my tennis game. The racket skills are subtly different, due to the
'wrist flick' in the squash technique.

And I _have_ noticed some transfer of skills and maybe even of the virtue of
patience both between the various sports and between the sports and other
repetitive activities, such as grading. There is a distinctive feeling I have
when I am half-way through something, and where I am fairly confident I can
finish it, and a kind of relaxation past the half-way point where I become
more patient, and time seems to flow “better”. For instance, I can compare how
tired I feel half-way through a long set of climbs and how tired I feel half-
way through a 2 km swim, and the comparison can give me some strength. Similar
positive thinking can happen while grading, things like “I can do it” or
“There isn’t all that much left.” Though there are also differences between
the sports and the grading, because in grading the quality of the work matters
a lot more, and since I am not racing against myself so there is no point of a
burst of speed at the end if I find myself with an excess of energy. Pacing is
also much less important for grading.

There are empirical indications that various skills and maybe even virtues are
pretty domain specific. It seems that being good at reasoning about one thing
need not make one good at reasoning about another, even if the reasoning is
formally equivalent.

I think that's correct. The more one concentrates on good form, the more
detrimental negative transfer becomes. This also applies in martial arts like
Tae Kwon Do, on the self-defense side, whereby training to 'pull' kicks and
punches (i.e. to safeguard your training partner), negatively transfers to
real-life situations.

I have no idea if anything like this transfer works for other people.

**Response:** That may be right in the simple case. But now imagine that the
“red” set is a saturated nonmeasurable subset of the spinner edge, and the
“green” set is also such. A saturated nonmeasurable subset has no reasonable
probability assignment, not even a non-trivial range of probabilities like
from 1/3 to 1/2 (at best we can assign it the full range from 0 to 1). Now the
reason-giving strength of a chancy outcome is proportionate to the
probability. But in the saturated nonmeasurable case, there is no probability,
and hence no meaningful strength for the red-based reason or for the green-
based reason. But there is a meaningful strength for the red-or-green moral-
cum-prudential reason. The red-or-green-based reason hence does not reduce to
two separate reasons, one moral and one prudential.

**Final remark:** The argument applies to any exclusive and exhaustive
division of reasons into “simple” (i.e., non-combination) types.

So what should we say? One possibility is to say that there are _only_ reasons
of one type, say the moral. I find that attractive. Then benefits to yourself
also give you _moral_ reason to act, and so you simply have a moral reason to
spin the spinner. Another possibility is to say that in addition to moral and
prudential reasons there is some third class of “mixed” or “combination”
reasons.

One might think that reasons for action are exhaustively and exclusively
divided into the moral and the prudential. Here is a problem with this.
Suppose that you have a spinner divided into red and green areas. If you spin
it and it lands into red, something nice happens to you; if it lands on green,
something nice happens to a deserving stranger. You clearly have reason to
spin the spinner. But, assuming the division of reasons, your reason for
spinning it is neither moral nor prudential.

**Objection:** The chance _p_ of the spinner landing on red is a prudential
reason and the chance 1 − _p_ of its landing on green is a moral reason. So
you have _two_ reasons, one moral and one prudential.

Now, one might have technical worries about saturated nonmeasurable sets
figuring in decisions. I do. (E.g., see the Axiom of Choice chapter in my
infinity book.) But now instead of supposing saturated nonmeasurable sets,
suppose a case where an agent subjectively has literally no idea whether some
event _E_ will happen—has no probability assignment for _E_ whatsoever, not
even a ranged one (except for the full range from 0 to 1). The spinner landing
on a set believed to be saturated nonmeasurable might be an example of such a
case, but the case could be more humdrum—it’s just a case of extreme
agnosticism. And now suppose that the agent is told that if they so opt, then
they will get something nice on _E_ and a deserving stranger will get
something nice otherwise.

It is correct to say that the Greeks discovered an incommensurability fact.
But it is, I think, worth noting that this incommensurability fact is not
really geometric fact: it is a geometric-cum-arithmetical fact. Here is why.
The claim that two line segments are commensurable says that there are
positive integers _m_ and _n_ such that _m_ copies of the first segment have
the same length as _n_ copies of the second. This claim is essentially
arithmetical in that it quantifies over positive integers.

And because pure (Tarskian) geometry is decidable, while the theory of the
positive integers is not decidable, the positive integers are not definable in
terms of pure geometry, so we cannot eliminate the quantification over
positive integers. In fact, it is known that the rational numbers are not
definable in terms of pure geometry either, so neither the incommensurability
formulation nor theory irrationality formulation is a purely geometric claim.

Don't you rather mean _"Th(something)"_ to be our "intended" model of
"something", such that "something" could be the naturals N, such that Th(N) is
our "intended" model of naturals N?!?  
  
Why isn't Th(N) recursively axiomattizaböe though?!?

I think it is sometimes said that it is anachronistic to attribute to the
ancient Greeks the discovery that the square root of two is irrational,
because what they discovered was a properly _geometrical_ fact, that the side
and diagonal of a square are incommensurable, rather than a fact about real
numbers.

I was thinking of the decidability of Th(N), where N is our "intended" model
of the naturals, not of the decidability of any particular recursive
axiomatization. (Th(N) is not recursively axiomatizable, of course.)

