This entry was posted on February 6, 2023 at 4:12 pm and is filed under
[Academic research & research
papers](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/academic-research-
research-papers/), [Economics - macro, micro
etc](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/economics-macro-micro-
etc/), [Financial Markets/
Finance](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/financial-markets-
finance/). You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/bitcoin-mining-meets-
wall-street-a-study-of-publicly-traded-crypto-mining-companies/feed/) feed.
You can leave a response, or
[trackback](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/bitcoin-mining-
meets-wall-street-a-study-of-publicly-traded-crypto-mining-
companies/trackback/) from your own site.

  *     * [ ![](https://s2.wp.com/i/logo/wpcom-gray-white.png) Mostly Economics ](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com)

This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. [Learn how your comment data is
processed](https://akismet.com/privacy/).

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F06%2Fbitcoin-mining-meets-wall-street-a-study-of-publicly-traded-crypto-mining-companies%2F&signup_flow=account)

****You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'wordpress' \);) /
Change )

  * [Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/bitcoin-mining-meets-wall-street-a-study-of-publicly-traded-crypto-mining-companies/?share=twitter "Click to share on Twitter")

_Many U.S. bitcoin miners have elected to organize themselves as listed
companies on the NASDAQ stock market, and by the end of 2022 more than a dozen
publicly traded crypto mining companies, representing about 24% of the global
hashrate, had floated their shares alongside those of more traditional miners
of gold, copper, aluminum, and other minerals. Operating as public
corporations represented a sharp break with the most common patterns of
organization in the industry, which had previously been dominated by private
partnerships and lone-wolf entrepreneurs._

****You are commenting using your Facebook account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'facebook' \);) / Change
)

_We find a negative and significant beta between crypto mining stocks and an
index of electric utilities, suggesting that ownership of a crypto mining
company might provide a useful channel for risk management in the electric
power industry._

_Disclosures by the publicly traded crypto miners have provided new
transparency into the operating risks, leverage, cost structure and supply
chain relationships in the mining industry._

  *   * [Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/bitcoin-mining-meets-wall-street-a-study-of-publicly-traded-crypto-mining-companies/?share=reddit "Click to share on Reddit")

  *   * [Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)](mailto:?subject=%5BShared%20Post%5D%20Bitcoin%20Mining%20Meets%20Wall%20Street%3A%20A%20Study%20of%20Publicly%20Traded%20Crypto%20Mining%20Companies&body=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F06%2Fbitcoin-mining-meets-wall-street-a-study-of-publicly-traded-crypto-mining-companies%2F&share=email "Click to email a link to a friend")

  * [Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/bitcoin-mining-meets-wall-street-a-study-of-publicly-traded-crypto-mining-companies/?share=facebook "Click to share on Facebook")

_For stockholders and bondholders, agreeing to become risk-sharing investors
in crypto mines might have seemed unusual, since the essential task in proof-
of-work mining involves little more than guessing random integers in an
attempt to solve puzzles by trial-anderror. The comparative advantage of
crypto miners lies in their ability to guess random integers rapidly, akin to
somebody skilled at approaching a lottery kiosk and buying many tickets very
quickly._

_Despite having relatively low activity levels, these Texas miners are more
profitable than those using more stable sources of energy such as hyrdo power
or solar power, as reflected in significantly higher enterprise values._

****You are commenting using your Twitter account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'twitter' \);) / Change
)

  * [Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/bitcoin-mining-meets-wall-street-a-study-of-publicly-traded-crypto-mining-companies/?share=linkedin "Click to share on LinkedIn")

  * [Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/bitcoin-mining-meets-wall-street-a-study-of-publicly-traded-crypto-mining-companies/?share=jetpack-whatsapp "Click to share on WhatsApp")

Didnt know that US bitcoin miners have registered themselves as listed
companies on NASDAQ:

« [The Hindenburg effect: Is it a storm that will pass or is a shake-up on the
cards?](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/the-hindenburg-
effect-is-it-a-storm-that-will-pass-or-is-a-shake-up-on-the-cards/)

_This paper studies the operations and financial valuations of 13
cryptocurrency mining companies that are listed on the NASDAQ stock exchange
and have facilities in North America. We find that miners using Texas wind
power are offline more than other miners, in a more erratic pattern, while
receiving significant revenue augmentations from “curtailment” payments by
electric utilities._

_Our paper studies how outside shareholders have valued bitcoin miners, and
how the publicly traded mining companies have adapted their strategies in an
environment that requires regular shareholder reporting and interaction with
Wall Street_  
analysts.

  1. ![](https://it.kiteku.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/cropped-cropped-2.png?w=32) [Il mining di Bitcoin incontra Wall Street. Uno studio sulle società di mining di criptovalute quotate in borsa - KiteKu](https://it.kiteku.com/il-mining-di-bitcoin-incontra-wall-street-uno-studio-sulle-societa-di-mining-di-criptovalute-quotate-in-borsa/) Says:   
February 6, 2023 at 5:50 pm

  * [Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/the-hindenburg-effect-is-it-a-storm-that-will-pass-or-is-a-shake-up-on-the-cards/?share=linkedin "Click to share on LinkedIn")

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F06%2Fthe-hindenburg-effect-is-it-a-storm-that-will-pass-or-is-a-shake-up-on-the-cards%2F&signup_flow=account)

Prof Aswath Damodaran [does a terrific job as
usual](https://aswathdamodaran.blogspot.com/2023/02/control-and-complexity-
deconstructing.html) of looking at the financials of the group and what that
means for financial markets.

  * [Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/the-hindenburg-effect-is-it-a-storm-that-will-pass-or-is-a-shake-up-on-the-cards/?share=jetpack-whatsapp "Click to share on WhatsApp")

[Bitcoin Mining Meets Wall Street: A Study of Publicly Traded Crypto Mining
Companies](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/bitcoin-mining-
meets-wall-street-a-study-of-publicly-traded-crypto-mining-companies/) »

  * [Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/the-hindenburg-effect-is-it-a-storm-that-will-pass-or-is-a-shake-up-on-the-cards/?share=twitter "Click to share on Twitter")

  1. ![](https://it.kiteku.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/cropped-cropped-2.png?w=32) [L'effetto Hindenburg. è una tempesta che passerà o è una scossa sulle carte? - KiteKu](https://it.kiteku.com/leffetto-hindenburg-e-una-tempesta-che-passera-o-e-una-scossa-sulle-carte/) Says:   
February 6, 2023 at 8:03 pm

  *   * [Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)](mailto:?subject=%5BShared%20Post%5D%20The%20Hindenburg%20effect%3A%20Is%20it%20a%20storm%20that%20will%20pass%20or%20is%20a%20shake-up%20on%20the%20cards%3F&body=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F06%2Fthe-hindenburg-effect-is-it-a-storm-that-will-pass-or-is-a-shake-up-on-the-cards%2F&share=email "Click to email a link to a friend")

[A podcast](https://www.thehindu.com/podcast/the-hindenburg-effect-is-it-a-
storm-that-will-pass-or-is-a-shake-up-on-the-cards-in-focus-
podcast/article66470637.ece) with G Sampath of The Hindu and myself on the
Hindenburg and Adani saga.

  * [Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/the-hindenburg-effect-is-it-a-storm-that-will-pass-or-is-a-shake-up-on-the-cards/?share=facebook "Click to share on Facebook")

This entry was posted on February 6, 2023 at 3:39 pm and is filed under
[Indian Economy/Financial
Markets](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/indian-
economyfinancial-markets/). You can follow any responses to this entry through
the [RSS 2.0](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/the-hindenburg-
effect-is-it-a-storm-that-will-pass-or-is-a-shake-up-on-the-cards/feed/) feed.
You can leave a response, or
[trackback](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/the-hindenburg-
effect-is-it-a-storm-that-will-pass-or-is-a-shake-up-on-the-cards/trackback/)
from your own site.

  *   * [Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/the-hindenburg-effect-is-it-a-storm-that-will-pass-or-is-a-shake-up-on-the-cards/?share=reddit "Click to share on Reddit")

  1. ![](https://it.kiteku.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/cropped-cropped-2.png?w=32) [Raggiungere un'economia da trilioni di dollari per il Tamil Nadu. alcune implicazioni e preoccupazioni - KiteKu](https://it.kiteku.com/raggiungere-uneconomia-da-trilioni-di-dollari-per-il-tamil-nadu-alcune-implicazioni-e-preoccupazioni/) Says:   
February 6, 2023 at 3:36 pm

  * [Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/achieving-one-trillion-dollar-economy-for-tamil-nadu-some-implications-and-concerns/?share=jetpack-whatsapp "Click to share on WhatsApp")

  * [Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/achieving-one-trillion-dollar-economy-for-tamil-nadu-some-implications-and-concerns/?share=twitter "Click to share on Twitter")

« [Financial Crisis in a Socialist Setting: Impact on Political Behavior,
Social Trust, and Economic
Values](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/financial-crisis-in-
a-socialist-setting-impact-on-political-behavior-social-trust-and-economic-
values/)

  * [Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/achieving-one-trillion-dollar-economy-for-tamil-nadu-some-implications-and-concerns/?share=facebook "Click to share on Facebook")

  *   * [Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/achieving-one-trillion-dollar-economy-for-tamil-nadu-some-implications-and-concerns/?share=reddit "Click to share on Reddit")

  * [Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/achieving-one-trillion-dollar-economy-for-tamil-nadu-some-implications-and-concerns/?share=linkedin "Click to share on LinkedIn")

[The Hindenburg effect: Is it a storm that will pass or is a shake-up on the
cards?](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/the-hindenburg-
effect-is-it-a-storm-that-will-pass-or-is-a-shake-up-on-the-cards/) »

  *   * [Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)](mailto:?subject=%5BShared%20Post%5D%20Achieving%20One%20Trillion%20Dollar%20Economy%20for%20Tamil%20Nadu%3A%20Some%20Implications%20and%20Concerns&body=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F06%2Fachieving-one-trillion-dollar-economy-for-tamil-nadu-some-implications-and-concerns%2F&share=email "Click to email a link to a friend")

_This study examines whether Tamil Nadu’s economy will become a US $1 trillion
economy by 2030, given its current slow growth regime, inflation, and rupee
depreciation. Our analyses indicate that, assuming an inflation rate of 5% and
2% exchange rate depreciation per annum, the Tamil Nadu economy needs to grow
at a real growth rate of 13.2% per annum for 8 consecutive years from 2023-24
to 2030-31 to reach the US $1 trillion target. Considering the growth
contributions of sub sectors, this study simulates multiple growth strategies
to achieve 9% overall growth, which would achieve the target in 2033-34.
Further, it examines whether export promotion will help to achieve this
target. Finally, it shows that the current level of debt-GSDP ratio is a
hindrance to growth. It suggests that ensuring 14% nominal (i.e., 9% real)
growth of economy, the state should target for a revenue surplus from 2023-24
onwards, such that it contains its fiscal deficit to only 2% level and obtains
a sustainable threshold debt level of about 18% in 2034-35._

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F06%2Fachieving-one-trillion-dollar-economy-for-tamil-nadu-some-implications-and-concerns%2F&signup_flow=account)

C. Rangarajan and K.R. Shanmugam [in this IPPR
paper](https://ippr.in/index.php/ippr/issue/view/16) analyse whether and how
Tamil Nadu could becom a one trillion dollar economy:

This entry was posted on February 6, 2023 at 3:23 pm and is filed under
[Academic research & research
papers](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/academic-research-
research-papers/), [Economics - macro, micro
etc](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/economics-macro-micro-
etc/), [Indian Economy/Financial
Markets](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/indian-
economyfinancial-markets/). You can follow any responses to this entry through
the [RSS 2.0](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/achieving-one-
trillion-dollar-economy-for-tamil-nadu-some-implications-and-concerns/feed/)
feed. You can leave a response, or
[trackback](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/achieving-one-
trillion-dollar-economy-for-tamil-nadu-some-implications-and-
concerns/trackback/) from your own site.

Ran Abramitzky, Netanel Ben-Porath, Victor Lavy & Michal Palgi [in this NBER
paper](https://www.nber.org/papers/w30918?utm_campaign=ntwh&utm_medium=email&utm_source=ntwg2)
look at a financial crisis in socialist setting:

  1. ![](https://it.kiteku.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/cropped-cropped-2.png?w=32) [La crisi finanziaria nell'ambiente socialista. influenza sul comportamento politico, sulla fiducia sociale e sui valori economici - KiteKu](https://it.kiteku.com/la-crisi-finanziaria-nellambiente-socialista-influenza-sul-comportamento-politico-sulla-fiducia-sociale-e-sui-valori-economici/) Says:   
February 6, 2023 at 1:26 pm

_Research on the political and social impacts of financial crises has focused
chiefly on free market economies, hindering our understanding of their effects
in other settings. We exploit an episode of a financial crisis that hit the
Israeli kibbutzim to study its impact in a socialist context. Contrary to
findings in capitalistic economies, the crisis led to increased support of
liberalized labor markets and reduced support for leftist political parties.
These effects persisted in the long run, especially among the young. The
crisis also reduced trust in leadership, but trust was restored shortly after
agreements to settle the debt were signed, relieving the severity of the
crisis. Our findings suggest that economic shocks may have different effects
in a free market and socialist systems, in both cases leading individuals to
question their current system._

  *   * [Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)](mailto:?subject=%5BShared%20Post%5D%20Financial%20Crisis%20in%20a%20Socialist%20Setting%3A%20Impact%20on%20Political%20Behavior%2C%20Social%20Trust%2C%20and%20Economic%20Values&body=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F06%2Ffinancial-crisis-in-a-socialist-setting-impact-on-political-behavior-social-trust-and-economic-values%2F&share=email "Click to email a link to a friend")

  * [Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/financial-crisis-in-a-socialist-setting-impact-on-political-behavior-social-trust-and-economic-values/?share=linkedin "Click to share on LinkedIn")

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F06%2Ffinancial-crisis-in-a-socialist-setting-impact-on-political-behavior-social-trust-and-economic-values%2F&signup_flow=account)

  * [Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/financial-crisis-in-a-socialist-setting-impact-on-political-behavior-social-trust-and-economic-values/?share=facebook "Click to share on Facebook")

  * [Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/financial-crisis-in-a-socialist-setting-impact-on-political-behavior-social-trust-and-economic-values/?share=jetpack-whatsapp "Click to share on WhatsApp")

This entry was posted on February 6, 2023 at 1:20 pm and is filed under
[Academic research & research
papers](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/academic-research-
research-papers/), [Economics - macro, micro
etc](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/economics-macro-micro-
etc/), [Financial Markets/
Finance](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/financial-markets-
finance/). You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/financial-crisis-in-a-
socialist-setting-impact-on-political-behavior-social-trust-and-economic-
values/feed/) feed. You can leave a response, or
[trackback](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/financial-crisis-
in-a-socialist-setting-impact-on-political-behavior-social-trust-and-economic-
values/trackback/) from your own site.

  * [Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/financial-crisis-in-a-socialist-setting-impact-on-political-behavior-social-trust-and-economic-values/?share=twitter "Click to share on Twitter")

  *   * [Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/financial-crisis-in-a-socialist-setting-impact-on-political-behavior-social-trust-and-economic-values/?share=reddit "Click to share on Reddit")

  *   * [Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)](mailto:?subject=%5BShared%20Post%5D%20Industrial%20policy%20is%20the%20new%20globalization&body=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F06%2Findustrial-policy-is-the-new-globalization%2F&share=email "Click to email a link to a friend")

> _It would be a mistake, however, to think that these [industrial] policies
> represent a move away from globalization. In fact they are an extension of
> globalization — and they likely will enable yet more globalization to come.
> That sounds counterintuitive, so let me explain._
>
> _Start with the domestic subsidies for green energy, as embodied in 2022’s
> Inflation Reduction Act. Those policies favor domestic firms in industries
> such as electric vehicles, batteries, and solar power. You could call that
> nationalism or even mercantilism. Yet those subsidies rely not only on a
> prior history of globalization but also an expected future for
> globalization. To the extent the US is able to extend its[domestic battery
> production](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-01-10/ev-battery-
> revolution-finally-arrives-in-america), it is because more lithium and other
> raw materials can be produced overseas and exported to the US. To the extent
> the US succeeds with its domestic solar industry, it is by drawing upon
> earlier advances in Spain, Germany and China — and undoubtedly future
> advances to come._
>
> _Even the most successful “nationalistic” industrial policies rely on a
> highly globalized world. If carried out strictly on a one-nation basis,
> industrial policy is doomed to fail. Globalization has been so thorough, and
> has gone so well, that at least a little industrial policy is now thinkable
> for many nations._

This entry was posted on February 6, 2023 at 1:15 pm and is filed under
[Academic research & research
papers](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/academic-research-
research-papers/), [Economics - macro, micro
etc](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/economics-macro-micro-
etc/). You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/industrial-policy-is-
the-new-globalization/feed/) feed. You can leave a response, or
[trackback](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/industrial-
policy-is-the-new-globalization/trackback/) from your own site.

  *   * [Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/industrial-policy-is-the-new-globalization/?share=reddit "Click to share on Reddit")

  1. ![](https://it.kiteku.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/cropped-cropped-2.png?w=32) [La politica industriale è la nuova globalizzazione - KiteKu](https://it.kiteku.com/la-politica-industriale-e-la-nuova-globalizzazione/) Says:   
February 6, 2023 at 10:27 pm

  * [Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/industrial-policy-is-the-new-globalization/?share=linkedin "Click to share on LinkedIn")

Well, well, well. how narrative changes. industrial policy was once called out
for substituting local over foreign and anto globalisaiton….now industrial
policy promotes exports and pro-globalisation..

> _Just as globalization can enable or support nationalist industrial policy,
> so the converse is true. Assume that these various industrial policies meet
> with some degree of success, and that China, the EU and the US all become
> more self-sufficient in various ways. Those same political units are more
> likely to then embrace and support further globalization…_
>
> _Some conservatives
> criticize[globalization](https://americancompass.org/searching-for-
> capitalism-in-the-wreckage-of-globalization/) while praising [industrial
> policy](https://www.manhattan-institute.org/resolved-that-america-should-
> adopt-an-industrial-policy). They are playing right into the hands of the
> Davos globalizing elite. In fact, that is the best argument for many of
> these ideas: Today’s industrial policy is not an alternative to
> globalization. It is preparing the world for the next round of it._

  * [Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/industrial-policy-is-the-new-globalization/?share=jetpack-whatsapp "Click to share on WhatsApp")

[Financial Crisis in a Socialist Setting: Impact on Political Behavior, Social
Trust, and Economic
Values](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/financial-crisis-in-
a-socialist-setting-impact-on-political-behavior-social-trust-and-economic-
values/) »

  * [Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/industrial-policy-is-the-new-globalization/?share=twitter "Click to share on Twitter")

  * [Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/industrial-policy-is-the-new-globalization/?share=facebook "Click to share on Facebook")

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F06%2Findustrial-policy-is-the-new-globalization%2F&signup_flow=account)

  * [Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/chatgpt-and-the-future-of-business-education/?share=facebook "Click to share on Facebook")

  * [Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/chatgpt-and-the-future-of-business-education/?share=twitter "Click to share on Twitter")

_While many of us are stunned by how impressive and natural the output can be,
it doesn’t mean it’s useful for everything we do. Here’s what we’ve found are
the major implications for research, teaching and learning._

Knowledge@INSEAD[ points](https://knowledge.insead.edu/leadership-
organisations/chatgpt-and-future-business-education) to views of some of the
professsors on impact of ChatGPT on Business Education:

  * [Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/chatgpt-and-the-future-of-business-education/?share=jetpack-whatsapp "Click to share on WhatsApp")

  *   * [Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/chatgpt-and-the-future-of-business-education/?share=reddit "Click to share on Reddit")

  * [Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/chatgpt-and-the-future-of-business-education/?share=linkedin "Click to share on LinkedIn")

_Over a million users have tested the potential and limits of ChatGPT – a
chatbot developed by AI research company OpenAI – to write emails, poems or
code, or even produce entire research papers. The chatbot recently passed a
Wharton School MBA exam, prompting further admiration and alarm._

  *   * [Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)](mailto:?subject=%5BShared%20Post%5D%20ChatGPT%20and%20the%20Future%20of%20Business%20Education&body=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F03%2Fchatgpt-and-the-future-of-business-education%2F&share=email "Click to email a link to a friend")

_Several academic journal publishers have banned authors from using ChatGPT,
and professors are changing exams and assignments in response to the tool. But
is ChatGPT a tipping point that will change business schools as we know them?_

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F03%2Fchatgpt-and-the-future-of-business-education%2F&signup_flow=account)

This entry was posted on February 3, 2023 at 4:23 pm and is filed under
[Discussion](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/discussion/). You
can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/chatgpt-and-the-future-
of-business-education/feed/) feed. You can leave a response, or
[trackback](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/chatgpt-and-the-
future-of-business-education/trackback/) from your own site.

  1. ![](https://it.kiteku.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/cropped-cropped-2.png?w=32) [ChatGPT e il futuro della formazione aziendale - KiteKu](https://it.kiteku.com/chatgpt-e-il-futuro-della-formazione-aziendale/) Says:   
February 3, 2023 at 4:52 pm

  * [Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/negative-rates-monetary-policy-transmission-and-cross-border-lending-via-international-financial-centres/?share=facebook "Click to share on Facebook")

  * [Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/negative-rates-monetary-policy-transmission-and-cross-border-lending-via-international-financial-centres/?share=jetpack-whatsapp "Click to share on WhatsApp")

Team of 12 economists (Desislava Andreeva, Andra Coman, Mary Everett, Maren
Froemel, Kelvin Ho, Simon Lloyd, Baptiste Meunier, Justine Pedrono, Dennis
Reinhardt, Andrew Wong, Eric Wong and Dawid Żochowski) [in this Bank of
England paper](https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/working-paper/2023/negative-
rates-monetary-policy-transmission-and-cross-border-lending):

  *   * [Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)](mailto:?subject=%5BShared%20Post%5D%20Negative%20rates%2C%20monetary%20policy%20transmission%20and%20cross-border%20lending%20via%20international%20financial%20centres&body=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F03%2Fnegative-rates-monetary-policy-transmission-and-cross-border-lending-via-international-financial-centres%2F&share=email "Click to email a link to a friend")

  1. ![](https://it.kiteku.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/cropped-cropped-2.png?w=32) [Tassi di interesse negativi, trasmissione della politica monetaria e prestiti transfrontalieri attraverso i centri finanziari internazionali - KiteKu](https://it.kiteku.com/tassi-di-interesse-negativi-trasmissione-della-politica-monetaria-e-prestiti-transfrontalieri-attraverso-i-centri-finanziari-internazionali/) Says:   
February 3, 2023 at 7:42 pm

This entry was posted on February 3, 2023 at 4:18 pm and is filed under
[Academic research & research
papers](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/academic-research-
research-papers/), [Financial Markets/
Finance](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/financial-markets-
finance/). You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/negative-rates-monetary-
policy-transmission-and-cross-border-lending-via-international-financial-
centres/feed/) feed. You can leave a response, or
[trackback](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/negative-rates-
monetary-policy-transmission-and-cross-border-lending-via-international-
financial-centres/trackback/) from your own site.

  * [Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/negative-rates-monetary-policy-transmission-and-cross-border-lending-via-international-financial-centres/?share=twitter "Click to share on Twitter")

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F03%2Fnegative-rates-monetary-policy-transmission-and-cross-border-lending-via-international-financial-centres%2F&signup_flow=account)

  * [Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/negative-rates-monetary-policy-transmission-and-cross-border-lending-via-international-financial-centres/?share=linkedin "Click to share on LinkedIn")

  *   * [Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/negative-rates-monetary-policy-transmission-and-cross-border-lending-via-international-financial-centres/?share=reddit "Click to share on Reddit")

_We study the effects of negative interest rate policies (NIRP) on the
transmission of monetary policy through cross-border lending. Using bank-level
data from international financial centres (IFCs) – the United Kingdom, Hong
Kong and Ireland – we examine how NIRP in the economies where banks have their
headquarters influences cross-border lending from financial-centre affiliates.
We find that NIRP impairs the bank-lending channel for cross‑border lending to
non-bank sectors, especially for those banks that have only a weak deposit
base in IFCs – and are thus relatively more exposed to NIRP in their
headquarters. Using euro-area data, including bank-level data from France, we
find that NIRP does not influence overall cross-border lending from banks’
headquarters’ economies, but NIRP does impair lending to financial sectors
based in IFCs. This impairment is stronger for banks with a large deposit base
in headquarter economies exposed to NIRP._

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F03%2Fusury-in-medieval-jewish-thought%2F&signup_flow=account)

  *   * [Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)](mailto:?subject=%5BShared%20Post%5D%20Usury%20in%20Medieval%20Jewish%20Thought&body=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F03%2Fusury-in-medieval-jewish-thought%2F&share=email "Click to email a link to a friend")

  * [Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/usury-in-medieval-jewish-thought/?share=facebook "Click to share on Facebook")

  * [Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/usury-in-medieval-jewish-thought/?share=twitter "Click to share on Twitter")

  3. [Usury in Medieval Jewish Thought – Calculus of Decay – Additional survival tricks](https://survivaltricks.wordpress.com/2023/02/05/usury-in-medieval-jewish-thought-calculus-of-decay/) Says:   
February 5, 2023 at 2:03 pm

This entry was posted on February 3, 2023 at 3:20 pm and is filed under
[Academic research & research
papers](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/academic-research-
research-papers/), [Financial Markets/
Finance](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/financial-markets-
finance/). You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/usury-in-medieval-
jewish-thought/feed/) feed. You can leave a response, or
[trackback](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/usury-in-
medieval-jewish-thought/trackback/) from your own site.

_This chapter surveys the writings of medieval Jewish rabbis on usury during
1050-1565. These writings belonged to three literary genres: legal,
ethical/pietistic, and Biblical commentary. After surveying the moralistic
condemnations of usury by medieval rabbis, I illustrate three theoretical
approaches to the lender’s legal obligation to return interest to the borrower
(post facto), which are implicit in medieval Jewish legal writings: novel
definition of robbery, monetary and quasi-ritualistic. I provide examples of
rabbinically-sanctioned circumventions of the usury ban via a Gentile
intermediary, and new rabbinic leniencies regarding loans of produce, buying
on credit, mortgages and investments. These circumventions and leniencies were
based on radical reinterpretations of Jewish Law. I conclude that there was a
striking contrast between the harsh moralistic condemnations of usury in
medieval rabbinic thought, and the legal flexibility demonstrated by the
medieval rabbis, who permitted circumventions of the Jewish usury laws as
concessions to the realities of commercial life._

  2. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/40807dee5ceac3ce8f825b06349a4c30?s=32&d=identicon&r=G) [Eric](https://calculusofdecay.com) Says:   
February 5, 2023 at 12:41 pm

  1. ![](https://it.kiteku.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/cropped-cropped-2.png?w=32) [L'usura nella mente ebraica medievale - KiteKu](https://it.kiteku.com/lusura-nella-mente-ebraica-medievale/) Says:   
February 3, 2023 at 10:18 pm

  *   * [Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/usury-in-medieval-jewish-thought/?share=reddit "Click to share on Reddit")

  * [Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/usury-in-medieval-jewish-thought/?share=jetpack-whatsapp "Click to share on WhatsApp")

  * [Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/usury-in-medieval-jewish-thought/?share=linkedin "Click to share on LinkedIn")

  *   * [Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/neoliberalisms-new-poster-child-revisiting-indias-growth-story/?share=reddit "Click to share on Reddit")

Prof C. P. Chandrasekhar who retired from JNU in the TheIndiaForum article
[gives an alternative
perspective](https://www.theindiaforum.in/economy/neoliberalisms-new-poster-
child-revisiting-indias-growth-
story?utm_source=newsletter&utm_medium=organic&utm_campaign=newsletter) on
India Growth Story:

_For a time, China, recording spectacular growth while it embraced market-
friendly policies and relied on export markets and foreign investment to raise
rates of growth, appeared to offer an option. But what it lacked was the
willingness to maintain a close, let alone subordinate, relationship with
western powers. After a brief period of bonhomie, China became the enemy
rather than an ally of neoliberal advance, accused of turning surreptitiously
protectionist, stealing technology and trade secrets, and posing a
geopolitical challenge to peace in Asia and elsewhere in the world._

  *   * [Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)](mailto:?subject=%5BShared%20Post%5D%20Neoliberalism%E2%80%99s%20New%20Poster%20Child%3A%20Revisiting%20India%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%9CGrowth%20Story%E2%80%9D&body=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F03%2Fneoliberalisms-new-poster-child-revisiting-indias-growth-story%2F&share=email "Click to email a link to a friend")

  * [Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/neoliberalisms-new-poster-child-revisiting-indias-growth-story/?share=jetpack-whatsapp "Click to share on WhatsApp")

_The West needed a new neoliberal exemplar, and India given it size, its
hostility to China, its willing to ally with the US, and with its commitment
to neoliberal policies that has only intensified, was an obvious candidate.
The difficulty was that India was no export-led manufacturing success. Rather,
it was a failure as a manufacturing nation, with the share of manufacturing in
total value added in the post-Independence era peaking at around 18 per cent,
as compared to the 35-40 per cent standard set by the earlier models of
neoliberal success._

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F03%2Fneoliberalisms-new-poster-child-revisiting-indias-growth-story%2F&signup_flow=account)

  1. ![](https://it.kiteku.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/cropped-cropped-2.png?w=32) [Il nuovo manifesto del neoliberismo. Rivisitare la "storia della crescita" dell'India - KiteKu](https://it.kiteku.com/il-nuovo-manifesto-del-neoliberismo-rivisitare-la-storia-della-crescita-dellindia/) Says:   
February 4, 2023 at 12:47 am

This entry was posted on February 3, 2023 at 2:23 pm and is filed under
[Academic research & research
papers](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/academic-research-
research-papers/),
[Discussion](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/discussion/),
[Indian Economy/Financial
Markets](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/indian-
economyfinancial-markets/). You can follow any responses to this entry through
the [RSS 2.0](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/neoliberalisms-
new-poster-child-revisiting-indias-growth-story/feed/) feed. You can leave a
response, or
[trackback](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/neoliberalisms-
new-poster-child-revisiting-indias-growth-story/trackback/) from your own
site.

_The advocates of neoliberal policies for the less developed countries have
always derived their strength from pointing, often wrongly, to the exceptional
economic performance of one or more countries that are identified as having
adopted such policies and maintained a close and subordinate relationship with
the advanced capitalist world. In the 1970s, South Korea and Taiwan were the
favourites, though many pointed to the fact that these governments were by no
means neoliberal in terms of their policy stance. The second-tier Asian
industrialisers like Thailand and Malaysia, with their manufacturing export
boom, were the choices in the 1980s and early 1990s. The Southeast Asian
crisis of 1997 that resulted directly from the liberalisation of financial
sectors in these economies deprived advocates of liberalisation of these
‘miracles’ that were showcased as examples of the benefits of neoliberal
policy regimes._

  * [Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/neoliberalisms-new-poster-child-revisiting-indias-growth-story/?share=linkedin "Click to share on LinkedIn")

  * [Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/neoliberalisms-new-poster-child-revisiting-indias-growth-story/?share=facebook "Click to share on Facebook")

  * [Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/neoliberalisms-new-poster-child-revisiting-indias-growth-story/?share=twitter "Click to share on Twitter")

Neil Williams, Chief Economist at OMFIF [in this
article](https://www.omfif.org/2023/02/japan-25-years-of-adding-liquidity-and-
counting/?utm_source=omfif&utm_medium=partner&utm_campaign=efi2022) reviews 25
years of Bank of Japan’s easy policies.

  *   * [Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/japan-25-years-of-adding-liquidity-and-counting/?share=reddit "Click to share on Reddit")

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F03%2Fjapan-25-years-of-adding-liquidity-and-counting%2F&signup_flow=account)

  * [Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/japan-25-years-of-adding-liquidity-and-counting/?share=linkedin "Click to share on LinkedIn")

  * [Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/japan-25-years-of-adding-liquidity-and-counting/?share=facebook "Click to share on Facebook")

  *   * [Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)](mailto:?subject=%5BShared%20Post%5D%20Japan%3A%2025%20years%20of%20adding%20liquidity%20and%20counting&body=https%3A%2F%2Fmostlyeconomics.wordpress.com%2F2023%2F02%2F03%2Fjapan-25-years-of-adding-liquidity-and-counting%2F&share=email "Click to email a link to a friend")

_This dependence was evidenced in November when the BoJ intervened to support
the yen as rates rose elsewhere. It was followed in December by the only 25
basis point rise in the bank’s 10-year government bond yield target, to 0.5% –
its second token rise since introducing a target in September 2016 (initially
set ‘close to zero’). The rise came as market vigilantes questioned the BoJ’s
resolve after months of rate increases and quantitative tightening by the US
Federal Reserve and Bank of England, and as the[European Central
Bank](https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7009160582964641792/)
prepared to supplement higher rates with QT._

This entry was posted on February 3, 2023 at 1:56 pm and is filed under
[Academic research & research
papers](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/academic-research-
research-papers/), [Central Banks / Monetary
Policy](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/category/central-banks-monetary-
policy/). You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/japan-25-years-of-
adding-liquidity-and-counting/feed/) feed. You can leave a response, or
[trackback](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/japan-25-years-
of-adding-liquidity-and-counting/trackback/) from your own site.

_Even as its liquidity provision passes its 25th year, the Bank of Japan looks
unlikely to tighten monetary policy in step with other central banks until
deflation is beaten and the Ministry of Finance can end its reliance on ultra-
low yields to control government debt costs.[Neither of these looks
likely](https://www.omfif.org/2022/07/breaking-japans-deflationary-
psychology/) to happen in the new governor’s five-year term starting on 9
April, and possibly beyond it._

  * [Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/japan-25-years-of-adding-liquidity-and-counting/?share=jetpack-whatsapp "Click to share on WhatsApp")

  * [Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/03/japan-25-years-of-adding-liquidity-and-counting/?share=twitter "Click to share on Twitter")

« [From the 1931 sterling devaluation to the breakdown of Bretton Woods:
Robert Triffin’s analysis of international monetary
crises](https://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2023/02/02/from-
the-1931-sterling-devaluation-to-the-breakdown-of-bretton-woods-robert-
triffins-analysis-of-international-monetary-crises/)

  1. ![](https://it.kiteku.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/cropped-cropped-2.png?w=32) [Giappone. 25 anni di miglioramento della liquidità e contabilità - KiteKu](https://it.kiteku.com/giappone-25-anni-di-miglioramento-della-liquidita-e-contabilita/) Says:   
February 4, 2023 at 3:25 am

