Like a lot of people I have been experimenting with the [openAI
playground](https://beta.openai.com/playground). Below a few examples and am
interested to hearing thoughts about what it can do. Obviously a lot has been
written about the image and coding capacities but I am mostly interesting in
its ability to generate text. I don't have any expertise in AI and I am
posting purely as someone trying to figure out the implications of this
technology being made so easily available for my areas of research and
teaching. My brief impressions so far is that the technology is sufficiently
advanced to be able to write essays in my area that would be very solid
provided the questions were on material with a solid amount of online
references to draw from. Anyone teaching courses being assessed by essays is
going to have to think about this but I think that has been the case for
several years in any case. It could also do very well specified scoping
reviews and summarise the papers but I wouldn't trust it without significant
human input. I definitely don't think it will replace research assistants
etc., and it might make the role of junior researchers more valuable by
increasing the value of the human element. Some of its summaries are uncannily
good and some look like they are just winging it and it is quite easy to lead
it into a path where it is being overconfident. I was impressed by its ability
to find and summarise papers on ethics of nudging ([posted
here](https://economicspsychologypolicy.blogspot.com/2022/12/openai-meets-
blog-ethics-of-nudging.html)) but I have not come away with a major sense of
the tasks I engage with having been fundamentally changed but open to
conversation. **Update: I also went to track down the papers it found and it
turns out they were not actually papers but just incredibly plausible titles
which is a learning experience on my side.**

**Could you translate the abstract of my paper linked here into French please
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/behavioural-public-
policy/article/nudge-forgood/06BC9E9032521954E8325798390A998A ** Une « poussée
» est un concept apparu récemment en politique publique qui combine une
certaine forme de paternalisme et des choix libres. Il s’agit de la
manipulation directe des choix des individus pour leur bien, sans les
contraindre à prendre une décision particulière. Ce concept est largement
utilisé par les gouvernements pour améliorer la santé publique,
l'environnement, le bien-être et l'économie. Dans cet article, nous discutons
de la manière dont le « nudge » peut être utilisé pour le bien et nous
insisterons sur le besoin d'une plus grande responsabilité et d'une plus
grande transparence dans le processus de mise en œuvre des « nudges ». Nous
proposons également des mesures pour garantir que les « nudges » sont imposés
de manière éthique et responsable.

I used Google Scholar and Web of Science to create a list of the most cited
papers in behavioural economics. This process drew mostly on m...

[SAGE and SPI-B were not equipped to advise on the impact COVID restrictions
would have](https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/covid19/2022/01/18/sage-and-spi-b-were-
not-equipped-to-advise-on-the-impact-covid-restrictions-would-have/)

[LSE Business Review: The Gig Economy is taking a toll on UK workers' mental
health](https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/2020/01/18/the-gig-economy-is-
taking-a-toll-on-uk-workers-mental-health/)

This post contains a list of online (mainly through audio or video) classes
that readers of this blog may be interested in. The list certain...

Blog Archive December 2022 (3) November 2022 (5) July 2022 (2) March 2022 (6)
February 2022 (1) November 2021 (1) June 2021 (1) April 2021 (6) March 2021
(1) February 2021 (1) January 2021 (1) November 2020 (1) October 2020 (2)
September 2020 (1) August 2020 (4) July 2020 (10) June 2020 (16) August 2018
(2) July 2018 (2) June 2018 (1) May 2018 (1) April 2018 (2) March 2018 (5)
February 2018 (3) January 2018 (5) December 2017 (6) November 2017 (5) October
2017 (12) September 2017 (1) August 2017 (2) July 2017 (1) June 2017 (2) May
2017 (3) April 2017 (10) March 2017 (5) February 2017 (6) January 2017 (9)
December 2016 (3) November 2016 (7) October 2016 (4) September 2016 (1) August
2016 (8) July 2016 (6) June 2016 (6) May 2016 (6) April 2016 (5) March 2016
(8) February 2016 (2) January 2016 (12) December 2015 (6) November 2015 (8)
October 2015 (6) September 2015 (9) August 2015 (7) July 2015 (7) June 2015
(11) May 2015 (9) April 2015 (16) March 2015 (7) February 2015 (25) January
2015 (12) December 2014 (8) November 2014 (15) October 2014 (26) September
2014 (16) August 2014 (15) July 2014 (20) June 2014 (30) May 2014 (9) April
2014 (21) March 2014 (22) February 2014 (14) January 2014 (19) December 2013
(8) November 2013 (14) October 2013 (13) September 2013 (23) August 2013 (10)
July 2013 (9) June 2013 (26) May 2013 (14) April 2013 (11) March 2013 (7)
February 2013 (8) January 2013 (23) December 2012 (14) November 2012 (25)
October 2012 (25) September 2012 (24) August 2012 (32) July 2012 (23) June
2012 (26) May 2012 (46) April 2012 (36) March 2012 (20) February 2012 (25)
January 2012 (13) December 2011 (23) November 2011 (35) October 2011 (44)
September 2011 (43) April 2011 (5) March 2011 (97) February 2011 (80) January
2011 (50) December 2010 (55) November 2010 (50) October 2010 (53) September
2010 (72) August 2010 (67) July 2010 (63) June 2010 (43) May 2010 (30) April
2010 (55) March 2010 (67) February 2010 (55) January 2010 (69) December 2009
(54) November 2009 (109) October 2009 (75) September 2009 (54) August 2009
(84) July 2009 (85) June 2009 (82) May 2009 (105) April 2009 (65) March 2009
(57) February 2009 (75) January 2009 (56) December 2008 (28) November 2008
(23) October 2008 (47) September 2008 (40) August 2008 (55) July 2008 (65)
June 2008 (75) May 2008 (58) April 2008 (68) March 2008 (55) February 2008
(49) January 2008 (69) December 2007 (47) November 2007 (26) October 2007 (27)
September 2007 (26) August 2007 (28) July 2007 (52) June 2007 (115) May 2007
(75) April 2007 (23) March 2007 (21) February 2007 (22) January 2007 (74)

**Are there any areas in my paper below that you think should be further
developed https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/behavioural-public-
policy/article/nudge-forgood/06BC9E9032521954E8325798390A998A ** Yes, there
are a few areas in this paper that could be further developed. For example,
the paper could provide more information on the effectiveness of different
types of nudges and how they vary in different contexts. Additionally, the
paper could explore the ethical implications of using nudges to influence
behavior and how these implications might vary depending on the context.
Finally, the paper could discuss the potential for nudges to be used in other
public policy areas, such as environmental or health policy. These are just a
few possible suggestions for areas that could be further developed in the
paper.

**The following is a conversation with an AI assistant. The assistant is
helpful, creative, clever, and very friendly.** **Human** : Hello, who are
you? **AI** : I am an AI created by OpenAI. How can I help you today?
**Human** : looking for thoughts on my paper. **AI** : Sure, I'd be happy to
help. What kind of paper is it? **Human** : Abstract Insights from the
behavioural sciences are increasingly used by governments and other
organizations worldwide to ‘nudge’ people to make better decisions.
Furthermore, a large philosophical literature has emerged on the ethical
considerations on nudging human behaviour that has presented key challenges
for the area, but is regularly omitted from discussion of policy design and
administration. We present and discuss FORGOOD, an ethics framework that
synthesizes the debate on the ethics of nudging in a memorable mnemonic. It
suggests that nudgers should consider seven core ethical dimensions: Fairness,
Openness, Respect, Goals, Opinions, Options and Delegation. The framework is
designed to capture the key considerations in the philosophical debate about
nudging human behaviour, while also being accessible for use in a range of
public policy settings, as well as training. **AI** : This is a great paper
and it looks like you have done a thorough job in exploring the ethical
considerations of nudging. However, I suggest that you consider adding a
practical example of how the framework works in policy settings to demonstrate
its utility. You could also explore how nudging technologies can be used to
influence mass behaviour and how this might be ethically problematic.
Additionally, I recommend looking into how the FORGOOD framework can be
applied in other contexts beyond policy making, such as in business and
marketing. **Human** : what would a good business example? **AI** : A good
example of how the FORGOOD framework can be applied in business settings would
be to examine how businesses use nudging techniques to influence customers to
make purchasing decisions. For instance, businesses could design certain
advertisements and promotions that frame a specific product in a positive
light and make it seem more attractive than other products. They should also
consider fairness, openness, respect, goals, opinions, options, and delegation
when designing these campaigns. Additionally, businesses may be creating
nudges without realizing it - think about how design features such as color
and layout of websites can influence a customer's purchase decision. Taking
into account the ethical implications of creating these nudges is essential.
**Human** : are there dimensions other than the seven we mentioned that are
important? **AI** : Yes, there are other important dimensions to consider. For
example, cultural awareness is essential when designing nudges in different
contexts. Nudges should be crafted to fit the needs of a specific cultural
context, taking into account local norms, values, and beliefs. Additionally,
it is important to understand the power dynamics related to the situation, as
nudging strategies can be used to manipulate or control the behaviour of
certain members of society.

**Write about prospect theory in the style of a shakespeare sonnet please **
Oh prospect theory, thou art yet so strange, Thy logic is so oft seen to
derange; Though many would thy science quickly change, ‘Tis still, a thought
that does so much arrange. Thy people do respond to losses more, Than gains
can ever hope to them restore; The value of a thing, they oft ignore, And so,
thy theory does so much explore. Thou hast shown us much, when risks do
abound, And what is safe, and what does bring us down; Thy loss-aversion's
grip, can oft astound, And so, our choices thou dost always sound. Though
prospect theory, thou art not complete, Thou still dost guide us when we do
compete; And so, thy power, we must not underestimate, For such decisions thou
dost so create.

During reading groups with students here at LSE, we will discuss papers from a
number of emerging literatures at the interface of behavioura...

Update : Here is the latest version of the Nudge Database pdf This is a list
of empirical ‘nudges’ and their sources with a particular emp...

This blog is maintained by Professor Liam Delaney to discuss issues at the
intersection of economics, psychology, and policy, and emerging fields such as
behavioural public policy and behavioural public administration. All posts are
offered in a personal capacity.

This is Part 7 of the Nudge Database. Thanks to Carlo Canepa for his help
putting it together. Part I || Part II || Part III || Part ...

It was a Scotsman named William Playfair who invented statistical graphics in
the 18th century, during that period when the Scots were buil...

This is a working list of European Masters Programs in Behavioural Economics,
Behavioural Science, Economics & Psychology and Decisio...

[H2020 RESPOND: Improving the Preparedness of Health Systems to Reduce Mental
Health and Psychosocial Concerns resulting from the COVID-19
Pandemic](https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/101016127)

Day-of-the-week effects have been mentioned on the blog before, including
research by Gerard O Neill from Amarach Consulting. A recent arti...

Many researchers consider randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to be the gold
standard methodology in the social sciences. Figure 1, taken...

This is one of a series of "living posts" that will updated periodically. See
more examples on the right-hand side-bar of the blog...

3\. [Understanding Society
blogpost](https://www.understandingsociety.ac.uk/2022/11/22/change-in-
pensions-policy-ensures-savings-for-people-with-mental-health-issues) on our
recent paper on autoenrolment and mental health gaps in pensions.

1\. [Very interesting ECB blogpost on
cryptocurrencies](https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/blog/date/2022/html/ecb.blog221130~5301eecd19.en.html).
Not favourable. Clearly an area where a lot more work is needed in terms of
consumer behaviour also.

> _LCCC require a Behavioural Scientist to help manage our growing Active
> Travel network within Limerick City and County. The Behavioural Scientist
> will conduct assessments with each stakeholders, decide on the most
> appropriate intervention required or implemented, and deliver effective
> measures to promotes usage of new & existing network._

2\. [Very interesting job
posting](https://www.limerick.ie/council/services/your-
council/jobs/behavioural-scientist-grade-vii-5-yr-ftc-closing-date-12th-0) for
a behavioural scientist working with Limerick County Council on transport
policy

Find me twenty papers published from 2020 onwards on ethics of nudging and
please include full citation and include the hyperlinks please?

These twenty papers discuss the ethics of nudging, which is a method that uses
subtle cues to influence people's decisions. They provide an introduction to
the topic and explore ethical aspects such as autonomy, dignity, and respect.
The papers also use frameworks for assessing the ethical quality of choice
architecture interventions in public policy and organizations, examining
existing research gaps and challenges for future research in business ethics
contexts, considering capabilities as a framework for ethical analysis,
discussing how to design responsible choice architectures that support
autonomy and dignity, exploring their ethical implications through empirical
studies in workplace contexts, providing normative foundations for evaluating
nudges, conducting systematic literature reviews on existing research gaps and
challenges related to nudging ethics; as well as analyzing public health
interventions during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Below is the output from asking [openAI](https://openai.com/) to generate 20
recent papers on the ethics of nudging. I also asked it to write the paragraph
summarising this. It is quite striking to see this. All of the paper titles
are highly relevant and the summary is very solid. There is obviously a lot to
think about in terms of how these technologies might be used to keep track of
and synthesise various literatures and the implications for teaching etc.,
**Update: I went to actually track down the papers and it turns out that they
are just very plausible titles rather than links to real papers. I am a bit
stunned by this tbh!**

1. Appel, A., & Schauer, F. (2020). Nudging and ethics: An introduction to the special issue. Journal of Business Ethics, 162(3), 587-595. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10551-019-04219-y 2. Böhm, S., & Kühnel, R. (2020). The ethical aspects of nudging – a systematic literature review on existing research gaps and challenges for future research in business ethics contexts. Journal of Business Ethics, 162(3), 613-630 .https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10551-019-04221-3 3. Chappell‐Dickinson, E., & Marris‐Wolfe, C. (2021). Ethical nudge design: Guidelines for creating ethically responsible nudges that support people’s autonomy. Business Ethics: A European Review, 30(1), 5-21 .https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/beer.12401 4. Dobson, L., & Whelan, B. (2020). Nudging with respect to autonomy and dignity: An ethical analysis of public health interventions in the United Kingdom during the COVID‐19 pandemic. Journal of Business Ethics, 162(3), 631-650 . https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10551-019-04223-1 5. Dulaey, M., & Smithson, S. (2021). Regulating nudging: a framework for discussing the ethics of behavioural interventions in organizations and beyond. Human Relations, 74(2), 283-304 .https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0018726720968861 6. Efferson C., Fischbacher U., Fehr E., McAdams R.(2020) Nudging for the Common Good: The Ethics of Choice Architecture. In: Guala F., Hertwig R. (eds) Foundations of Behavioral and Experimental Economics. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham .https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-030-38705-7_14 7. Eriksson, J., & Sandberg, S. (2020). Achieving ethically legitimate nudging in public health contexts—considering capabilities as a framework for ethical analysis . Journal of Business Ethics, 162(3), 651-669 . https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10551-019-04222-2 8. Frey B., Oberholzer‐Gee F., Steiner T.(2020) Nudge Theory Meets Ethical Philosophy: Toward a Framework for Assessing the Legitimacy of Nudges International Review of Law and Economics, 63:101195 .https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0144818820300741?via%3Dihub 9. Gola, M., & Kühnel, R. (2020). Nudging in the workplace–A review of ethical considerations and research gaps . Journal of Business Ethics, 162(3), 717-737 .https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10551-019-04220-4 10. Greiner C., Heilig S., Schubert J.(2021) The ethics of nudging: A systematic literature review International Review Of Law And Economics 62:101179 . https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0144818820300077?via%3Dihub 11. Guinan P.(2020) Nudges and paternalism: An exploration into their ethical implications International Journal Of Social Welfare 29(4): 413-422 . https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ijsw.12455 12 .Häyry M., Helkama K., Väyrynen S.(2021) Nudging and the ethics of public policy: A critical review International Review Of Law And Economics 62:101178 .https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0144818820300065?via%3Dihub 13. Holmqvist, M., & Eriksson, J (2020). The ethical implications of nudging in digital environments–A framework for analysis based on a capability approach . Journal of Business Ethics, 162(3), 671-689 .https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10551-019-04224-0 14. Hsiao, Y.-C., & Xu, X.-Y.(2020) Nudges and ethics: An empirical study about the effectiveness of nudge interventions in influencing employee unethical behavior intention in China’s workplace context . Journal of Business Ethics, 162(3), 739-756 . https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10551-019-04225-z 15. Janssen, M., & van Dijck, S. (2020). Ethical nudging: A framework for assessing the ethical quality of choice architecture interventions in public policy and organizations . Journal of Business Ethics, 162(3), 597-612 . https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10551-019-04218-z 16. Johnson E., Böhm S.(2021) Nudging with Respect: How to Design Responsible Choice Architectures that Support Autonomy and Dignity International Review Of Law And Economics 62:101180 .https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0144818820300053?via%3Dihub 17 .Kühnel R.(2020) The ethics of nudging – An introduction from an economic perspective International Review Of Law And Economics 61:101175 .https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0144818820002335?via%3Dihub 18 .Müller‐Funk U., Kühnel R.(2021) Nudging in the workplace – A critical review International Review Of Law And Economics 62:101176 . https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0144818820300041?via%3Dihub 19. Sandberg, S. (2020). The ethics of nudging and behavioural public policy interventions: A capability approach perspective . Journal of Business Ethics, 162(3), 691-715 . https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10551-019-04226-y 20. Tucker C., Schubert J., Heilig S.(2020) Normative Foundations for Evaluating Nudges International Review Of Law And Economics 63:101197 .https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S01448188

3\. [Paper by Herd and Moynihan](https://journal-
bpa.org/index.php/jbpa/article/view/306) connecting the administrative burden
literature to the emerging behavioural public administration literature,
introducing a symposium on behavioral implications of administrative burden

> Abstract: Many behavioral scientists propose and test policy interventions
> that seek to 'fix' problems with individual behavior (adopting an "i-frame")
> rather than addressing the system in which individuals operate (an
> "s-frame"). The impact of such i-frame interventions has been disappointing
> and can reduce support for much-needed systemic reforms. Highlighting
> individual responsibility for societal problems is a long- established
> objective of corporate opponents of s-frame policies such as regulation and
> taxation. Thus, researchers advocating i-frame solutions may have
> unwittingly promoted the interests of the opponents of systemic change.
> Behavioral scientists can best contribute to public policy by employing
> their skills to develop and implement value-creating system-level change.

> The stated preference literature contains an expansive body of research on
> behavioral anomalies, typically understood as response patterns that are
> inconsistent with standard neoclassical choice theory. While the literature
> often implies that anomalous behaviors are distinct to stated preferences,
> widespread evidence of similar patterns across real-world settings raises
> the potential for an alternative interpretation. We argue that these
> anomalies might actually reflect behaviors that are to be expected once
> deviations from the standard economic model and behavioral reactions to the
> choice architecture in stated preference surveys are considered. The article
> reviews and organizes the evidence of so-called “anomalous” stated
> preference behaviors within the context of behavioral science to provide
> guidance for applied welfare economics. We coordinate evidence on these
> anomalies using a typology grounded in behavioral science, which groups non-
> standard behaviors into: non-standard preferences, non-standard beliefs, and
> non-standard decision-making. We apply this typology to organize the
> evidence, clarify nomenclature, and understand the implications of non-
> standard behaviors in stated preference studies for applied welfare
> analysis. Observing the systematic and common nature of these behaviors in
> actual and hypothetical settings, we outline possibilities to overcome
> associated challenges for applied welfare analysis, by adapting new
> frameworks for welfare analysis proposed within behavioral science.

It is still very difficult to know fully what to do about posting on twitter.
I have not deleted my account. I am not actively posting. I RT'd the happy
announcement of one of our PhD students passing their viva on the basis that
many people on my timeline know the student and would want to celebrate. My
current mood with it is basically to see this as a transition phase before
something new emerges. I have continued to engage with mastodon ([link
here](https://nerdculture.de/@liamdelaney2020)). It has been exciting to see
various people and groups move there and I highly recommend trying it out but
it is clearly still open as to what function it will begin to fill. The main
problem for me is that there are many people on twitter I would like to stay
connected to and it is sad to just burn all of that. For now, will continue to
post here on the blog and link through mastodon and Linkedin.

4\. [Anomalies or Expected Behaviors? Understanding Stated Preferences and
Welfare Implications in Light of Contemporary Behavioral
Theory](https://ideas.repec.org/p/war/wpaper/2022-20.html). Enjoyed working on
this paper with colleagues that attempts to bridge the stated preference
literature with the emerging literature on behavioural welfare economics.

5\. [List of most-read
papers](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/behavioural-public-
policy/most-read) on Behavioural Public Policy here. The FORGOOD paper is
still there but more generally it is fascinating list of papers and the wider
journal itself is a treasure-trove for people interested in developing a
behavioural public policy literature bringing disciplines such as philosophy,
psychology, and economics together to understand human behaviour in policy-
relevant environments.

> The topic of administrative burden is relatively novel, but reflects
> people’s most common experiences of government: confusion about what is
> expected of them (learning costs), onerous processes (compliance costs), and
> associated emotions such as frustration (psychological cost). This symposium
> applies a behavioral perspective to the topic. We learn, for example, of the
> role of race and social constructions in people’s beliefs about burdens and
> their role in social programs. We are given evidence of how burdens restrict
> access to important public services. Perhaps most usefully, the authors
> engage with different interventions to find ways to reduce burdens. This
> ranges from changes in the physical space, to process redesign, to
> informational nudges. The resulting work provides a broad range of applied
> empirical insight that shines a light on a pressing area of study.

6\. "[Ten years of Automatic Enrolment in Workplace Pensions: statistics and
analysis](https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/ten-years-of-automatic-
enrolment-in-workplace-pensions/ten-years-of-automatic-enrolment-in-workplace-
pensions-statistics-and-analysis)" Recent document released by UK government.
The impact of auto-enrolment on pension participation in the UK has been
extraordinary. Opt-out rates in line with the low numbers anticipated by the
literature that led up to it.

2\. [The i-frame and the s-frame: How focusing on individual-level solutions
has led behavioral public policy
astray](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/behavioral-and-brain-
sciences/article/iframe-and-the-sframe-how-focusing-on-individuallevel-
solutions-has-led-behavioral-public-policy-
astray/A799C9C57F388A712BE5A8D34D5229A1) Article by Chater and Loewenstein in
Behavioural and Brain Sciences is obviously generating a lot of commentary.

It culminates in a simulation exercise where students work off-site in groups
to finalise and present their projects. Faculty attend either as executives
from NGBS or representatives from the philanthropy organisation. Students work
on their presentation throughout the day and are given some prompts as to
areas of focus from the organisation. It finishes with a set of presentations
and then the students spend the following week finalising the reports before
submission. Topics last year included applied behavioural science projects in
areas such as gambling, climate change, emerging digital financial products,
pensions, pandemic readiness, and others. Some random photos from the first
event held at WeWorks Canary Wharf are below. Attending this event was one of
my career highlights from the education side of my job, and in general the
framing of the simulation encourages students to really give their best and
come up with interesting ideas and to present them well.

In terms of giving some shape as to the future direction of behavioural
science, students are provided with a reading list to give them a sense of the
type of things we are trying to cultivate. An indicative reading list is below
but this changes rapidly each year

Along with my colleagues at LSE Department of Psychological and Behavioural
Science, Miriam Tresh, Bradley Franks, and Chris Hunt, with support from the
EDEN Centre at LSE, we have developed a simulation exercise for our students
(currently focused on undergraduates) which has various titles but is coming
to be known as Next Generation Behavioural Science (NGBS). NGBS is a simulated
non-profit research organisation that our undergraduate students encounter in
their final year as part of a course on advanced applications of behavioural
science.

Students are assessed in two ways as part of this course - firstly they put
together a portfolio of all the work they have conducted on the degree so far
to illustrate how their ideas and skills are relevant to the organisation.
They are then hired in various capacities (research analyst, policy analyst,
stakeholder liaisons) to work on a set of projects for the agency,
commissioned by a fictitious global philanthropy group. All this takes place
alongside a set of lectures throughout the year that examine applied
behavioural science applications, as well as lectures on wider issues such as
ethical and cultural aspects of applied behavioural science. There are
frequent classroom discussions about the ideal quality of a behavioural
science non-profit, ethical aspects of projects, the future direction of this
area etc., Students are encouraged to look closely at existing applied
behavioural science groups and to reflect on good practice, and their own
ethical and normative stances.

I would be interested to hear more about how universities, public bodies,
charities, etc., are responding to the events at twitter. There have obviously
been many reports of advertisers getting jittery. It doesn't seem credible for
bodies like universities to continue to post in an official capacity on
twitter at a time where there is no certainty at all what is going to happen
to content moderation, controls on hate spread, control on undue influence
from the owner etc., At the very least, public bodies should be ready to
elaborate their rationale for remaining on the platform. Universities will be
reluctant, for good reasons, to be dragged into ideological arguments but to
continue to post is in itself a position and one that potentially debases the
institutions. This will likely come to a head soon anyway if they are being
asked to pay to keep accounts verified. Even if the payments will be small it
will create a decision point in each institution and one where mounting
disquiet might come to the fore.

I have joined Mastodon (<https://nerdculture.de/web/@liamdelaney2020>). I am
still very wobbly legged using it. Though I have made progress. I have figured
out mostly how to find and follow people. There are a lot of psychologists on
the platform, and the open-science community in particular seems to have made
a co-ordinated move there. I am a bit worried personally about how to work
with the norms of the local groups. I joined a server called nerd-culture
simply because I liked the name and it was available. I am worried about
whether I am intruding. It will take some time to figure it out but it is
definitely worth exploring and I could easily see it becoming a replacement
for twitter for scientific communities. In general the role of the individual
servers on Mastodon is something that will take a lot of time for non-tech
folks like me to get a strong sense of. Linkedin also clearly is a substitute
for job announcements, events, etc., and in many ways might be better for that
type of thing than twitter.

One thing that many people, including me, have realised is that [google
news](https://news.google.com/) is a reasonable replacement for the doom-
scrolling function of twitter. If you want to spend a few minutes getting
bombarded with info about topics or places of interests, you can quite easily
set up google news to do that. It doesn't have the personalised edge of a
twitter feed but it does remove the worry of losing out on being informed. I
maintain subscriptions to a few national newspapers and have access to others
through the university, and in general still like to buy a broadsheet
newspaper. The events with twitter have made me think again about the issue of
how much one should pay for media and how to spread across different types.

3\. New paper by Leo Lades and Federica Nova [Ethical Considerations when
using Behavioural Insights to Reduce Peoples Meat
Consumption](https://ideas.repec.org/p/ucd/wpaper/202209.html) Interesting use
of our FORGOOD behavioural ethics framework.

4\. [The President’s Initiative on Junk Fees and Related Pricing
Practices](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/blog/2022/10/26/the-
presidents-initiative-on-junk-fees-and-related-pricing-practices/).
Fascinating new initiative and one that we will add to [reading
groups](https://economicspsychologypolicy.blogspot.com/2022/03/behavioural-
science-and-emerging.html) in this area.

1\. Michael Muthukrishna points to a really [useful new
measure](https://world.culturalytics.com/table?countryA=&countryB=&countries=All&dimension=All&question&years=2010-2014&years=2005-2009&confidenceInterval=false&level=dimension&search=&appearance=flag-
name) of cultural distance between regions.

5\. Details of the 15th annual Irish economics, psychology, and policy
workshop [available here ](https://bsp.ucd.ie/15th-annual-economics-and-
psychology-conference-december-16-2022/)

2\. From last year and open access, [Nancy Cartwright's paper on rigour versus
the need for evidential
diversity](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11229-021-03368-1) is
very thought-provoking. In general our literatures should engage more directly
with her thinking in this regard.

Like a lot of people, am thinking about how to proceed with social media. For
now, am going to go back to basics and use the blog here to update on anything
particularly interesting I see emerging in our areas.

The owner has obviously been very successful in other areas of life. I am
agnostic as to whether he can find a sustainable business model for the
platform. A model where more people pay and folks that create particularly
valuable things are remunerated doesn't sound crazy but I have absolutely no
idea whether it can work on a platform where freedom of use has been a
feature. Given the type of people he is interacting with and other things he
has been interested in, it seems likely that cryptocurrencies in some guise
will be part of the future model. One thing that is interesting is whether
twitter develops significantly improved technology, including enhanced filter
and edit capacities etc., I don't know whether general dislike or distrust of
the owner and backers will stop people from engaging in a better technology.
Popular resistance to technology changes is an interesting area to think about
in terms of how this plays out.

I am not sure what to make of the recent twitter take-over. The owner now
seems to have full control over all aspects of the operations and is
progressing a highly chaotic review of how the platform will work. I don't
want to participate in something like that, at least for now. Participating in
all social media, including this one I am posting on now, involves complex
ethical calculations and, even before the takeover, it was getting
increasingly tricky to see how much the platform needs heated engagement to be
financially sustainable.

It would also be good to understand more about potential winners and losers if
there is a large shift in the composition of twitter users, including in cases
where it moves into decline. How many people, outside of twitter employees
themselves (who I feel sympathetic toward and hope do well), rely on the
platform to make a living? How many need it for basic types of expression and
co-ordination that are not possible through other platforms? Are there people
who particularly rely on the platform to avoid social isolation? Are there
particularly serious cases emerging? At a low level, I feel guilty about
losing the ability to offer encouragement to earlier career colleagues. Even
something simple as liking a post about a new job or paper felt at least
somewhat like creating the idea of a community of people who are broadly
supportive. Instinctively, I think graduate students and early career
researchers are the most resourceful when it comes to technology trends though
and I expect them to find lots of ways to fulfil functions such as
professional networking, corridor talk, structured procrastination. Even
without the current takeover, it is probably no harm to shake it up as twitter
had certainly lost any of the sense of excitement that was there in its
earlier days.

Most basically, the tone the owner is setting is not something I want to be
part of. It is not simply a matter of blocking the person. He is regularly
updating on what might be transformative shifts to the platform so he is going
to have a major role in setting the overall vibe. Constant shit-posting and
goading of people is just bizarre behaviour and a feature of the overall world
that I am amazed to see so prevalent. I am worried that it is going to make
co-operation between large groups of people increasingly difficult and at a
basic level don't want to support someone like that. Anyone who has had to
deal with narcissists off-line will know the fight-or-flight responses it
generates. Relatedly, it feels repugnant that one person can simply take
control of a platform in such an obnoxious way. The current owner did not
cause the circumstances that led to that happening but maybe he has given us a
very salient wake-up call as to the problems of the public sphere being so
fragile.

It has been an interesting time to think about alternatives. Many people in my
networks have set up mastodon accounts, including me
(https://nerdculture.de/web/@liamdelaney2020). I am happy to try this out and
keep an open mind on where it might go. For academia, it seems to me that
Linkedin is a fairly obvious focal point for things like job postings, events,
etc., For those of us mildly addicted to the general chatter of twitter,
Linkedin doesn't offer a substitute for that and it will be interesting to see
whether people stick with and/or generally drift back to twitter, or whether
something else becomes a focal point. I will be posting here for now and
figuring out how to keep in touch with people.

In terms of my own use of twitter, I guess the "golden age" was the period
just after the financial crisis where many people adopted the forum and the
style was quite conversational. The most useful professional function was
using it to build a global research network particularly when we built our
research group in Stirling. During lockdown and during two periods of moving
from Ireland to UK I found twitter a way of keeping broadly in the loop with
people. I have not posted very frequently in the last 18 months or so but it
still feels valuable to have connections to former colleagues, students, and
people in the broad networks I am involved with.

Below is a very long way of saying I will be posting links and updates here
for the next while.

In the last few years, it was a shock to see the amount of racist and
authoritarian material constantly floating around. In general, the site became
harder to relate to on a personal level and a lot of the posts started to feel
contrived. Even on points where you find yourself broadly agreeing, the tone
of a lot of tweets started to feel like talking points that had been pre-
tested to gain emotional engagement, or that "the algorithm" itself was
pushing people who had high degrees of certainty and valence about their
topics. Also twitter's default mode of showing you "top tweets" meant you were
often seeing talking point tweets that had been liked by other users or even
posted by people that other connected users were following, frequently
resulting in a sense of being overwhelmed by the noise of conversations you
didn't agree to be part of. With ruthless use of the mute button, and
regularly resetting your settings to chronological mode, it was still possible
up to recently to produce a feed consisting of people you were learning
something from and interested to hear from. Something like that is still
something that a lot of people, including me, want to continue in some form.

On broader level, I think there is a pretty urgent question for many bodies
that broker to some degree in trust. Obviously there is a massive discussion
happening with corporations, in particular twitter advertisers, over how
twitter will protect brands in the context of the upheaval. Less discussed is
whether things like universities, health agencies, public authorities, etc.,
should continue to participate on a platform where the owner has not yet given
any serious idea on how things like fake accounts spreading obvious
disinformation will be addressed. It could, in any case, be a time for
different bodies to think about social media strategies. In the case of
universities, is it now really the case that every university should have a
verified twitter account?

I will use this blogpost to update on job opportunities that people send me.
Obviously, no posting is an endorsement though I will try to post ones that
will be interesting to the type of people who keep an eye on the blogposts.

[Two postdocs](https://tahayasseri.com/join/) working with computational
social science team led by Prof Taha Yasseri at UCD.

[Several positions at CogCo](https://cogco.co/jobs/), a really interesting new
company that is employing quite a few behavioural science graduates.

