Another, secondary response to Gel’s point is that we might have good reason
for thinking that co-location of ordinary material objects is impossible. Lots
of philosophers defend this on grounds independent of IoI.

But this misses the point. _Of course_ the argument for God’s unicity denies
only the possibility of any _ad extra_ differentiating feature between
distinct **beings** of pure esse. _But nowhere did I deny this_. My point was
simply that _the reason for thinking_ that there cannot be any _ad extra_
differentiating feature of this kind between **beings** _equally justifies the
claim_ that there _also_ cannot be any _ad intra_ differentiating feature
between **divine persons**. Obviously Gel’s argument itself is simply cast in
terms of **beings** and _ad extra_ differentiation among them and so doesn’t
by itself entail anything about _ad intra_ differentiation among **divine
persons**. My point was simply that _accepting_ that argument should _also_
lead one to accept a _different_ argument that disallows _ad intra_
differentiation among **divine persons**. And the reason is the **epistemic
symmetry** mentioned in my paragraph above (and in my original piece). There
just doesn’t seem to be any principled reason for thinking that a
differentiating feature compromises a **being’s** pure esse status while a
differentiating feature suddenly _doesn’t_ compromise a **divine person’s**
pure esse status. That is, there doesn’t seem to be a relevant difference
between **beings** and **divine persons** that could account for why a
differentiating feature had by **beings** _would_ compromise their pure esse
status while a differentiating feature had by **divine persons** _wouldn’t_
compromise their pure esse status. Just as a **being** with a differentiating
feature that’s _allegedly_ pure esse would instead ultimately be pure esse
**_plus_** that differentiating feature (and so not truly pure esse _as such_
), so too would a **divine person** with a differentiating feature that’s
_allegedly_ pure esse ultimately be pure esse **_plus_** that differentiating
feature (and so not truly pure esse _as such_ ). The reasoning in the ‘ **
_plus_** that differentiating feature’ argument is **perfectly general**.

**Second** , I’m not sure how Gel is using ‘indiscernibility’ in this passage.
As it’s used in the context of the explicability-motivation for IoI (according
to which the properties that individuate substances _explain why_ those
substances are distinct), x and y are _discernible_ iff _and because_ it is
not the case that the set of x’s properties is identical to the set of y’s
properties—i.e., iff _and because_ there’s some property that one has which
the other lacks. So in saying that _rectangularity_ and _circularity_ are not
indiscernible—i.e., that they are discernible—Gel seems to be saying that
there _are_ further individuating properties in virtue of which
_rectangularity_ and _circularity_ are distinct. But then he’s contradicting
his earlier claim in the passage that the explanation for their distinction is
_not_ something else. Now, this apparent contradiction gives us reason to
think Gel is _not_ using “indiscernibility” in the aforementioned sense. But
then he should be clarifying what he means, firstly, and secondly, it seems
dialectically improper to use a crucial term _differently_ from how it’s used
in the context of the objection at hand.

But it seems clear that there could only be one person with the GSA*-property.
For suppose there are two distinct persons, Alpha and Omega, both of whom have
the GSA*-property. Because of that, Alpha and Omega would simultaneously be
_sourced in_ and _dependent upon_ each other, which is viciously circular –
Alpha will be explaining Omega’s existence only insofar as Omega will be
explaining Alpha’s existence, but Omega will be explaining Alpha’s existence
only insofar as Alpha will be explaining Omega’s existence. So, at most only
one perfect person can have the GSA*-property. But if a perfect person would
plausibly have the GSA*-property (as was established above), it follows that
there could only be one perfect person.

I conclude, then, that my second criticism of premise (2) stands. Onward we
march to the third criticism.

Gel continues: “For instance, I have one pencil on my desk. But if I allow it
is possible that, were I see one pencil, there are in fact two distinct
indiscernible pencils, I’m not sure I can continue to be confident that there
is only one pencil on my desk. Consider also that, presumably, if it is
possible for there to be two distinct indiscernible objects, it is also
possible for there to be three, four, ten, or a million of them. Hence,
without IoI or some principle like IoI, we would constantly be in the dark as
to how many objects we encounter in everyday experience.”

[8] This doesn’t require the truth of nominalism. It just requires that God is
different from us when it comes to the relationship between entitative
character and property possession—something that classical theists already
accept (albeit in a different fashion).

[18] This just contraposes Gel’s claim that if they _are_ perfections, then
there couldn’t be more than one perfect being.

Thanks for the comment! I must be brief, as my grad app deadlines are fast
approaching.

**First** , it’s not immediately clear at this juncture whether claiming that
these properties are perfections is dialectically appropriate. For if there
_could_ be more than one perfect being, then the properties to which Gel
appeals _are not perfections after all_ ,[18] and hence to assert that they’re
perfections _just is_ to assert, in part, that there couldn’t be more than one
perfect being—and yet that’s the very question at issue. Admittedly, this
worry gets into really tricky waters in Perfect Being Theology (PBT). For
example: when are we entitled to claim that some property P is a perfection?
Must we first know that P is even _possible_ to begin with? Or is the
intuition that <P is a perfection> _itself_ a reason to think P is possible?
While I would be inclined to the latter view (at least with my theist hat on),
it’s still not entirely clear how to answer these questions. Furthermore,
there’s considerable controversy over them in the PBT literature.

It should be clear at this point why this doesn’t work: _the_ ** _exact same
thing_** _can be said about_ ** _distinct beings_** _of pure esse_. _Each of_
** _them_** _could be identical with_ ** _their own unique characteristic_**
_, which is_ ** _exactly_** _what Gel is saying here about the_ ** _divine
persons_** _._ **** In fact, if you’ll recall, **_Gel’s response here_** _,
cast in terms of_ ** _divine persons_** _,_ ** __**_is_ ** _exactly the same
response_** _that_ ** _I gave_** _, cast in terms of_ ** _beings_** _, in
response to Gel’s rejoinder to my criticism (a)_ —I made precisely the point
that A could be _identical_ to its unique characteristic F-ness whereas B
could be _identical_ to its unique characteristic G-ness. To put things
differently: Gel is here responding to the criticism that the divine persons,
in virtue of possessing differentiating characteristics, would have to be pure
esse **_plus_** that differentiating characteristic. How does he respond? By
saying _no, because the divine persons are each_ ** _identical_** _to their
respective differentiating characteristics_. **But _literally the same thing_
can be said about _beings_ of pure esse** in response to Gel’s claim that each
such being would have to be pure esse **_plus_** their differentiating
characteristic. In particular, the appropriate response is _no, because the
beings are each_ ** _identical_** _to their respective differentiating
characteristics_. It surprises me that Gel doesn’t ask whether his response
here—that the **divine persons** needn’t be pure esse **_plus_** their
differentiating characteristic—would equally carry over to **beings** and
thereby undermine his unicity argument. (It does, as I’ve explained.)

Let’s now consider Gel’s response to the **second point** in my criticism of
premise (1)—namely, that a primary motivation for IoI, namely _explicability_
, fails. Keep in mind that even if Gel successfully meets this second point,
my first point remains unscathed: Gel’s argument rests on an unjustified
assumption.

Gel grants that this is a fair criticism against the original justification
for premise (2). He then argues that the criticism doesn’t work against his
new (tripartite) justification for premise (2):

But I don’t think this is right. We can do perfectly well without IoI by
simply using the standard theoretical virtues here. In particular, when
presented with competing hypotheses—say, about the number of ordinary objects
we encounter in everyday experience—we can assess these hypotheses on account
of their simplicity and explanatory power. If one hypothesis clearly
outcompetes the others along these dimensions, we accept that hypothesis. And,
indeed, the hypothesis that minimizes the chaotic overcrowding Gel speaks of
clearly outcompetes the others along these dimensions, as I will explain
below. We can thus make perfect do without IoI. There is no risk of chaotic
overcrowding or of agnosticism about the number of ordinary objects we
encounter. Standard theory comparison assuages these threats.

(1) I guess I’m operating under the assumption that if we have an opportunity
or a reason to accept one hypothesis or explanation over another, we’d be
rational to take/accept it because it would provide us a more-complete picture
of the world. LL provides that closure as a metaphysical background principle.
This seems like enough of a reason to provide a tiebreaker. Actually, I think
LL would entail that it ISN’T the case that both of the hypotheses explain the
data equally well. Per LL, the hypothesis postulating that the objects are
identical is the stronger one, all things considered. That’s what would make
it a tie-breaker. So evaluating which hypothesis is stronger in a way that
doesn’t take into account LL seems like putting the cart before the horse.

****You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'wordpress' \);) /
Change )

Setting aside the profoundly dubious nature of the ‘further considerations’
Gel merely adumbrates, this is irrelevant to the point of the parodies. The
point of the parodies is that **_if_** you accept the original arguments from
perfection to the uniqueness of divine **beings** , **_then_** you should also
accept symmetric arguments from perfection to the uniqueness of divine
**persons**. Gel’s response here doesn’t engage the truth of this conditional;
his response simply denies its consequent. _So be it_ if you have reasons for
denying the consequent; that just means you should also deny its antecedent
(by modus tollens), and hence you should not accept the **original** arguments
from perfection for the uniqueness of divine **beings**. Nothing Gel says here
addresses **the conditional itself** (or the parodies and epistemic symmetry
that justify it).[19]

Gel writes that “without IoI, our ontology runs the risk of getting
chaotically overcrowded very quickly – or at least the possibility of this
should force us to remain agnostic as to the number of ordinary objects we
encounter in everyday experience.”

In this section, Gel asks… you guessed it… whether these arguments can be used
by the naturalist.

I’ll be skipping the first section “In previous papers…”, since it simply
summarizes the thus-far-trodden dialectic and sets the stage for Gel’s
article.

Consider also that the GSA-property, together with the ability to freely
exercise one’s own power, constitutes the property of having complete control
over all other concrete objects. But ‘[i]t is good to have power over other
things’ existence … Power over existence is degreed. Complete power over all
other concrete things’ existence is its maximum, and so plausibly a
perfection’ (Leftow (2012), 22). In this case, the GSA-property is a
constituent of another perfection, and so a perfect being would have the GSA-
property.

Note, though, that _the same can be said_ with multiple beings of pure
esse—their _esse_ ’s are different because _they_ are different. And _they_
may be different either primitively or because they are discernible (say, A is
identical to its F-ness while B is identical to its G-ness, where F-ness isn’t
G-ness). (Be thankful that I’m using ‘F-ness’ and ‘G-ness’ rather than
‘P-ness’!)

Now, Gel recognizes _something kinda like_ this point when he writes: “At this
point, could someone claim the problem to be that any justification for (7b)
will inevitably carry over to (7a), creating a bridge between the unicity
argument and the parody argument? Might one say, for instance, that if the Son
has his proper characteristic (filiation) in distinction to the Father, then
the Son can’t be the same being of pure _esse_ than the Father, but being
_plus_ filiation?”

[13] And this epistemic symmetry is precisely what I conveyed in my original
response piece. In setting up my parody, I explicitly said that “the exact
same reasons for thinking there could only be one purely actual _being_ of
pure _esse_ would equally motivate thinking that there could only be one
purely actual _divine person_ of pure esse” (p. 7). Notice I’m saying that the
_motivation_ for Gel’s argument cast in terms of **beings** _equally
motivates_ a different argument—the one that I immediately proceed to
give—cast in terms of **persons**.

“While theism posits additional kinds Oppy does without— _non-physical_ ,
_unlimited_ , _perfect_ —because of this the theist is able to give a more
unified account of the kinds Oppy recognizes. For the theist, _all_ that is
physical falls under the kinds _contingent_ and _caused_. For Oppy, _some_ of
what is physical falls under the kinds _contingent_ and _caused_ , but _other_
physical things fall under the kinds _necessary_ and _uncaused_. It seems that
the denial of the additional theistic kinds comes at the price of additional
naturalistic kinds (or subkinds). This seems to be a multiplication of overall
complexity difficult to compare with that of the theist.”

My responses will follow the order of Gel’s paper, with sections corresponding
to Gel’s sections. The titles of my sections will therefore be along the lines
of “ **Gel, “[insert Gel’s section title]”** ”

**Third** , trinitarian parodies of all sorts rear their heads. (Remember,
even if Gel’s arguments themselves are cast in terms of _unique_ ** _beings_**
, the point is that the _motivations_ Gel offers _equally motivate_ **new**
arguments cast in terms of _unique_ ** _persons_**.) Below I survey each
argument and offer a trinitarian parody thereto. For each argument and its
corresponding parody, there seems to be an epistemic symmetry between them of
precisely the kind discussed earlier. I see absolutely no reason for thinking
the arguments cast in terms of **beings** are more acceptable than their near-
identical counterparts cast in terms of **persons** , and the justifications
for their key steps are essentially identical. If you accept the former, you
should also accept the latter.

Gel’s offers **three** closely related new justifications for premise (2)
(following the lines defended in Feser (2017, pp. 121–122)). Here’s the
**first** :

“Another problem I see is that Schmid relies on the idea that ‘Oppy’s entities
are a proper subset of the classical theist’s’ (Schmid (2022), 4). But this
does not seem true, since Oppy’s ontology contains something which does not
figure in the theist’s – an uncaused necessary initial physical state with a
beginning.”

The point is that it’s conceivable to have a scenario where we have to explain
the presence of two indiscernible objects in certain locations but the
divergent hypotheses we use to explain them (eg one hypothesis saying they’re
identical and the other saying they’re different) are equally complex due to
extraneous factors. So simplicity won’t really get us anywhere in determining
which of the two hypotheses is correct. In this case, it seems like Leibniz’s
Law would provide the tie-breaker. I should prefer the hypothesis where the
balls are identical.

Consider that F is a perfection if it is ‘objectively and intrinsically such
that something F is more worthy of respect, admiration, honor, or awe than
something not F, _ceteris paribus_ ’ (Leftow (2012), 178). But it seems that
something unique—like a unique divine person (i.e., a divine person who is the
only divine person)—is more worthy of respect, admiration, honor, or awe than
something _not_ unique—like a non-unique divine person (i.e., a divine person
who _isn’t_ the only divine person) . Hence, being unique seems to be a
perfection. But there does not appear to be any incompatibility with being
unique and other properties a perfect person ought to have. Hence, we can say
that, plausibly, a perfect person would be unique. There cannot, in other
words, be more than one perfect person.

[14] The troubles afflict both Feser’s articulation and Gel’s, since they’re
the same argument. I include Feser’s articulation for three reasons. First,
seeing different articulations of the argument aids understanding. Second,
Feser’s articulation is admirably clear and pithy. Third, doing so allows me
to shamelessly plug my forthcoming Springer book, which should hopefully be
fully published within the next month or two.

This entry was posted in
[Uncategorized](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/)
by [Majesty Of
Reason](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/author/majestyofreason/).
Bookmark the
[permalink](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2022/11/24/classical-theism-
first-causes-and-naturalism-a-response-to-enric-gel/ "Permalink to Classical
Theism, First Causes, and Naturalism: A Response to Enric Gel").

  *     * [ ![](https://majestyofreason.files.wordpress.com/2019/12/cropped-spinoza.jpg?w=50) Majesty of Reason ](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com)

I won’t examine one-by-one Gel’s sub-arguments in this section for the claim
that uniqueness (or something which entails as much) is a perfection.[17] I
will here simply note some serious worries that need to be addressed in order
for Gel’s sub-arguments to succeed.

[19] Compare: suppose I argue that if a blue ball could come into existence
uncaused, then a red ball could also come into existence uncaused. And suppose
my reason for thinking this is that there seems to be no relevant difference
between a blue ball and a red ball with respect to coming into existence
uncaused. It’s no use responding to the conditional by arguing that a red ball
couldn’t come into existence uncaused (i.e., by arguing for a denial of the
conditional’s consequent). This simply doesn’t challenge the conditional, and
nor does it challenge the reason offered on its behalf.

I grant you that Gel’s pencil example is somewhat confused and doesn’t get to
the heart of what you’re trying to say. A while back on Twitter I sent you
some worries over whether or not we can distinguish between identical theories
if we reject LL. I now realize that this is unfounded, as LL applies to
entities and facts, not propositions and hypotheses.

[3] But aren’t there _many more ways_ for there to be more than one pencil and
_**only one**_ way for there to be a single pencil, as Gel notes in his
footnote 5? Yes, but those ways are so metaphysically profligate, arbitrary,
and unexplanatory that _even their disjunction_ fails to compete with the
single pencil hypothesis. What matters isn’t just the _number_ of ways but
_how much of the probability space is accorded to them (both individually and
collectively)_. (Also: if the fact that there were many more ways for there to
be more than one pencil meant that the hypothesis that there’s more than one
pencil swamps the single pencil hypothesis in terms of intrinsic probability,
this would be disastrous for theism’s intrinsic probability, since there are
_infinitely many_ ways for the first cause’s properties to fail to be maximal
and only _one_ way for them to be maximal (and so theistic). Consider, e.g.,
that there’s only _one_ way to be omniscient but _infinitely many_ ways to
fail to be omniscient—one could know every fact _but one_ , or _but two_ , or
_but three_ , or etc. Similarly for omnipotence: there’s only _one_ way for a
first cause to be omnipotent but _infinitely many_ ways to be impotent in some
manner—one could have the power to do everything _except_ one task, or two
tasks, or three tasks, etc. _Mutatis mutandis_ for other candidate properties
of the first cause.) Also, note that we could make all of my points in this
section in terms of Bayesianism rather than theoretical virtues. I’ve simply
chosen the theoretical virtues construal so as to avoid technicalities that
quickly lose readers.

I conclude, then, that my first criticism of premise (2) stands. Not only does
Gel’s original proffered justification for premise (2) fail (which Gel seems
to grant), but his three _new_ justifications for premise (2) succumb to the
same fate.

**Key terms** : a list of the terms I’ll use to abbreviate the relevant papers
in the dialectic

Gel begins by noting that theism gains a _ceteris paribus_ point in its favor
vis-a-vis naturalism by the former’s ability (and the latter’s inability) to
explain the number of first causes. However, there are two things to note
here. First, as I argued in my original response—and as Gel’s recent responses
have failed to salvage— _Gel has_ ** _not_** _shown_ that theism has an
explanation of the number of first causes, since the arguments that Gel
proffers fail. (Or, in the case of the arguments from perfection, it’s _not
immediately clear_ that they succeed, and furthermore they create problems for
trinitarianism.) Second, Gel’s arguments almost invariably _add to the
complexity of theism_ —by, e.g., adding the monumentally controversial
principle IoI, or adding claims about which properties are perfections
together with controversial claims about the appropriate methodology for PBT,
etc. So _even if_ Gel secures a point in theism’s favor, this may very well be
offset by incurred complexity costs. Note, moreover, that the onus is on
**Gel** to show that the gain in explanatoriness outweighs the incurred
complexity cost. As of yet, he has shown no such thing.

Gel also points here to his earlier ‘compelling reasons’ for accepting IoI.
But as I’ve explained, Gel’s proffered reasons aren’t ‘compelling’ in the
slightest.

Recently, Enric F. Gel published a
[response](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/religious-
studies/article/there-can-be-only-one-a-response-to-joseph-c-
schmid/F05CFC25EB594A750B15C61BF6DE3281) to my[
response](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/religious-
studies/article/naturalism-classical-theism-and-first-
causes/C8B373E5EA8C6AC0D386DD247AB92803) to his[ original
paper](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/religious-studies/article/how-
many-and-why-a-question-for-graham-oppy-that-classical-theism-can-
answer/6A02C937BB5E7CF12C70B5DC3D532CA9) in _Religious Studies_. I thank Enric
wholeheartedly for his (gloriously meme-filled) response, and I also thank
Enric for being the awesome person he is. (I’ve really enjoyed our public and
private interactions!) In this post, I’ll be responding to Enric’s most recent
response.

(3) Even if we have this tie-breaker that you speak of — even if we take the
minimization of indiscernible things to be a theoretical virtue — I think a
reply in my main text still stands: “this isn’t an _explanation_ for why there
is only one being of pure esse. What we have here is simply _good epistemic
reason_ to think that there is only one.” So I don’t think this move, even if
successful, ultimately helps Gel’s case.

Gel’s rejoinder to my response in _Religious Studies_ , “‘[There can only be
one.’ A Response to Joseph C.
Schmid](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/religious-
studies/article/there-can-be-only-one-a-response-to-joseph-c-
schmid/F05CFC25EB594A750B15C61BF6DE3281)” = **Gel’s recent piece**

I made **two points** in criticizing (1). The **first point** was that Gel
simply _assumed_ IoI (and hence premise (1)) without any justification. The
**second point** was that a primary motivation of IoI—explicability—doesn’t
work. Gel responds to each of these points in turn.

Gel says each divine person is still perfect in being identical to one and the
same perfect substance, God. But this simply fails to engage the parodies. The
parody arguments (and their epistemic symmetry with the original argument)
give us reason to think that the divine persons are **_not_** __**_perfect_**
_after all_ if there’s more than one of them. In other words, the
epistemically symmetric parody arguments give us reason to think that there
_cannot_ be multiple persons that are perfect in being identical to a perfect
being. It’s no use just blithely asserting, in response, that the multiple
persons are perfect in being identical to a perfect being, **_since I just
gave an argument for thinking that’s false_**. Gel needs to address the
**_argument_** , not just flatly assert the falsity of its conclusion. I’ve
given **_reasons_** for thinking the conclusion is true, and merely asserting
the conclusion’s falsity simply fails to engage those reasons.

[5] I’m not claiming that Gel attributes this claim to me; I’m simply
clarifying my objection. I make this clarification because someone _might_
think, upon reading Gel’s response here, that my objection rests on this
claim. I’m simply clarifying that it doesn’t! 🙂

[11] I will assume that you have read Gel’s section here and so know what
(6a), (6b), (7a), (7b), (8a), and (8b) are.

Gel’s original paper in _Religious Studies_ , “[How many and why? A question
for Graham Oppy that classical theism can
answer](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/religious-studies/article/how-
many-and-why-a-question-for-graham-oppy-that-classical-theism-can-
answer/6A02C937BB5E7CF12C70B5DC3D532CA9)” = **Gel’s original piece**

(1) I don’t see why one hypothesis, in the case you described, should be
preferred over another, if indeed they are the same with respect to
simplicity, modesty, and any other factor that determines intrinsic
probability. They both seem to explain the data equally well, and so — given
your stipulations — I don’t see why we shouldn’t just remain agnostic on which
is true. I don’t (yet) see the need for a tie-breaker.

Another problem for the restriction of IoI to substances is that the same
_motivations_ for thinking IoI holds of **substances** _also_ motivate
thinking IoI holds of **properties**. Notice that we can run exactly the same
‘chaotic overcrowding’ argument that Gel runs, but this time in terms of the
chaotic overcrowding of **properties** —parodying Gel, “without IoI as applied
to **properties** , our ontology runs the risk of getting chaotically
overcrowded with **properties** very quickly—or at least the possibility of
this should force us to remain agnostic as to the number of ordinary
**properties** we encounter in everyday experience.” We can also run the same
skeptical scenarios concerning the number of **properties** we ordinarily
encounter as Gel runs concerning the number of **objects** we ordinarily
encounter, etc. So the restriction strategy is inherently unstable—the reasons
for thinking IoI holds of substances equally motivate thinking IoI likewise
holds of properties. So, if we should accept IoI as applied to substances, we
should likewise accept IoI as applied to properties. But as I explained in my
original response piece, we should not accept IoI as applied to properties,
since that yields a vicious infinite grounding regress. Hence, we should not
accept IoI as applied to substances.

For some mysterious reason, this ‘unique characteristic’ that each person
possesses doesn’t make them pure esse _plus_ their unique, differentiating
characteristic. And for some equally mysterious reason, a unique
characteristic of a _being_ of pure esse that differentiates it from other
such beings _would_ make it pure esse _plus_ its unique, differentiating
feature. My point here is simply this: any reason for thinking that there
could be differentiating features among _divine persons_ consistent with their
being pure esse _also_ seems to be a reason for thinking there could be
differentiating features among _beings_ consistent with their being pure esse.
Or, equivalently: any reason for thinking there couldn’t be differentiating
features among _beings_ of pure esse _also_ seems to be a reason for thinking
there couldn’t be differentiating features among _divine persons_ of pure
esse. There just doesn’t seem to be a relevant difference between the cases.
If you get to posit differentiating features among _divine persons_ consistent
with each being pure esse, I simply see no reason for ruling out
differentiating features among _beings_ consistent with each being a being of
pure esse. This is the heart of the syllogism from (1)–(7) and stands
irrespective of the particular ways in which the divine persons are distinct
from one another and identical-in-being to pure esse. All that matters is the
seeming epistemic symmetry between (i) differentiating features _not_
compromising a _divine person’s_ status as pure esse and (ii) differentiating
features _not_ compromising a _being’s_ status as pure esse.

[20] This is only one dimension of simplicity—to wit, Oppy’s _ontological
simplicity_. Note that Gel doesn’t address my case that naturalism is simpler
than theism along the other dimensions of simplicity.

“Finally, consider what Leftow calls the GSA-property (short for ‘God, Source
of All’): x has the GSA-property if, for any concrete substance wholly
distinct from x, x and only x makes ‘the creating- _ex-nihilo_ sort of causal
contribution’ to its continued existence (Leftow (2012), 21). As Leftow
argues, the GSA-property is either a perfection or a constituent of other
perfections. Why think this? First, consider that ‘[b]eing a potential
ultimate source of some proportion of what benefits things is a good property
to have’ (Leftow (2012), 22). But being the ultimate source of _all_ that
benefits things would be the maximal degree of this good property, and hence,
given that ‘a property is a perfection iff it is the maximal degree of a
degreed good attribute to have’ (Leftow (2012), 22), being the ultimate source
of all that benefits things is a perfection. Now, such a perfection supervenes
on the GSA-property – and so, either the GSA-property, by a plausible
supervenience principle, is itself a perfection or it is a necessary condition
of a perfection. In either case, a perfect-being will have the GSA-property.

Now, you might object that for each of them to be _divine_ , or for each of
them to be _pure esse_ , they must at least minimally share some essential
attribute, such as _divinity_ or _pure-esse-hood_. But why? Why not instead
suppose that they each simply have their own (e.g.) _trope_ of _divinity_ or
_pure-esse-hood_ (along lines similar to Dr. Joshua Sijuwade’s classical
theistic, trope-theoretic model of God)? Or why not take a nominalist approach
to such beings, such that there are no such things as divine properties that
any such being possesses (and, _a fortiori_ , no properties they share in
common)?[8] Or perhaps each being only possesses divinity or pure-esse-hood
_analogously_ to the other being(s), such that we block the need for some
essential feature that they share in common but nevertheless preserve our
ability to truthfully and literally (albeity analogously) predicate ‘pure
esse’ and ‘divine’ of _each_ of them. (This is precisely how classical theists
allow us to truthfully and literally predicate (say) ‘power’ and ‘knowledge’
of both God and creatures without committing us to features that God and
creatures share in common!) To be sure, _Gel_ might not accept these
possibilities; but that’s utterly irrelevant. What matters is whether _Gel’s
argument for uniqueness_ has given us any reason to _rule each of these out_ ,
i.e., to think they’re _all_ _false_. His argument has done no such thing, and
so—as it stands—the argument fails.

The relevant difference seems quite clear to me. As substances possess
properties and not vice-versa, substances are distinguished in virtue of the
properties inhering within them (or which they’re identical to). It doesn’t
seem like we should give up this notion, given how compelling essentialism is.
But then how can their properties be distinguished? Some properties can be
understood in virtue of more fundamental properties, but unless we opt for
infinite regresses instead of foundational grounding, properties will have to
bottom out on some level. Can we explain bottom-level properties (which may or
may not inhere in fundamental substances a la Aristotle’s four elements) in
terms of further properties? No, because they have to bottom out. Can we
differentiate them in virtue of the substances which they are or inhere in?
No, because we’re invoking properties to differentiate substances in the first
place. The bottom-level properties are just primitively differentiated while
the bottom-level substances in which they inhere are differentiated *in virtue
of those primitively individuated properties.* So even though these bottom-
level properties are primitively-individuated, it does not follow that the
same is true of the substances which they are identical to or inhere in. Nor
does it follow that because their properties are primitively-individuated,
their substances must be as well.

I know you have stuff to do, but I have just one more thing…

In this section (and its two subsections), Gel offers two further arguments
for God’s unicity. Below I examine each in turn.

We should note, though, that this isn’t the point I was making (although it’s
_kinda_ similar thereto). The point of my criticism isn’t that the
justification for (7b) carries over to (7a); as I’ve explained, the point is
that the justification for _Gel’s original premises (1) and (2)_ carries over
to the _new, parody premises (1) and (2) (i.e., (6a) and (7a))_. And, in light
of my _actual_ point, Gel’s earlier responses about _ad intra_ and _ad extra_
differentiation, as well as about invalidity, entirely fall by the
wayside—they simply miss the point. So if Gel wants to salvage his case, he
needs his response to the abovequoted point to successfully rebut my actual
point. What’s his response? It’s highlighted in blue:

Thus, Gel’s responses to my parody argument fail. My argument **isn’t**
invalid; it **doesn’t** equivocate between _ad extra_ and _ad intra_
differentiation; and Gel’s response to the central point about justification
transference between the parody argument and the original unicity argument
(wherein Gel identifies the divine persons with their differentiating
characteristics) ends up undermining Gel’s unicity argument. I conclude, then,
that my original trinitarian parody stands unscathed.

Gel finishes the section by alleging that theism has other advantages over
naturalism, but his discussion is brief and punts to other works and arguments
for justifications of key claims. As such, there really isn’t much to address
here without doing an in-depth examination of those other works.

In connection with (6) (i.e., (1) of my parody), Gel writes in footnote 21:

“The first argument Aquinas gives in the _Summa Theologiae_ for divine unity
appeals to divine simplicity. Because God’s essence and existence are
identical—because he just _is_ his existence—his essence is not something that
can be shared with anything else, so that in the nature of the case there
cannot be more than one God.” (Forthcoming)

[7] I don’t need specific candidates for such features in order for my
objection here to succeed (since the onus is on _Gel_ to rule out even my
abstractly characterized scenario). Alas, here are some options. Perhaps A is
pure esse and identical to its omnipotence (F-ness), whereas B is pure esse
and identical to its _quasi_ -omnipotence (G-ness), where a being is _quasi_
-omnipotent iff it can do do everything an omnipotent being can do _except_
for some trivial task in some remote possible world. Or perhaps A is pure esse
and identical to its omniscience, whereas B is pure esse and identical to its
_quasi_ -omniscience (G-ness), where a being is _quasi_ -omniscient iff it
knows everything an omniscient being knows _except_ for some trivial truth in
some remote possible world. Or perhaps A is pure esse and identical to its own
impassibility (F-ness), whereas B is pure esse and identical to its _diff_
-impassibility (G-ness), where a being is _diff_ -impassible iff its conscious
state _slightly_ differs in qualitative character from an impassible being’s
conscious state (which is pure, infinite bliss/joy/happiness/delight—cf.
Mullins’ paper
[here](https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/opth-2020-0110/html?lang=en)
articulating the classical doctrine of impassibility). (We all know that
different types and tokens of joy, happiness, and delight have slightly
different phenomenological feels, so there’s nothing extravagant here.) Or
perhaps F-ness is _trinitarianhood_ and G-ness is _unitarianhood_. Or etc.
Examples can be multiplied _ad nauseam_ for those who want to nitpick about
the particularities of the aforementioned examples. Importantly, I don’t see
any good reason for thinking that being pure esse is incompatible with (e.g.)
quasi-omnipotence, or quasi-omniscience, or diff-impassibility, or
unitarianhood, or what have you. (You can’t claim that pure esse would be
unlimited, and yet the quasi- properties entail limits. For (trinitarian)
Thomists already grant a certain kind of limit in God (to wit, a limit in the
number of persons). And besides, this doesn’t apply to diff-impassibility,
unitarianhood, and countless other candidates for G-ness.)

Again, this just misses the point of the trinitarian parody. The point isn’t
whether the wording of the argument would only apply to distinct _beings_.
Everyone grants that. The point is that the **_justification_** for thinking
that something absolutely simple cannot share an essence with another
**being** _would equally justify_ a **different** premise in a **different**
argument according to which something absolutely simple cannot share an
essence with another **_person_** , such that accepting the former argument in
terms of **beings** should lead one to accept the latter argument in terms of
**persons**. It is patently irrelevant to this claim to point out that the
wording of the original argument by itself entails nothing about whether a
simple essence can be shared among distinct _persons_. The point at hand is
that the **_reasons for accepting_** the _original_ premise cast in terms of
**distinct beings** _also apply_ to a _new_ premise cast in terms of
**distinct persons**. So, once again, Gel has failed to avert the trinitarian
parody.

This won’t work. First, by ‘differentiating feature’ between x and y, I simply
mean what I take Gel and Pawl to mean when they talk about a ‘unique
characteristic’ in virtue of which the divine persons are numerically distinct
from one another. It’s simply something that x has (or is) and which y doesn’t
have (or isn’t). So it’s not an option to deny the use of this expression,
since it’s essentially the same as what Gel and Pawl (and Trinitarians more
generally) already apply to the divine persons. Second, denying application of
IoI to divine persons fails to engage my criticism, since (part of) my
criticism is precisely that the _same motivation for thinking that IoI applies
to_ ** _beings_** _equally motivates thinking IoI applies to_ ** _persons_**
_._ It is not an option to simply assert that IoI applies to the former but
not the latter; one must address my case that one has no motivation for
accepting that IoI applies to the former that doesn’t also motivate accepting
that IoI applies to the latter.[12]

“Consider now that a perfect being would plausibly possess supreme or absolute
value. But something is more valuable in the same measure as it is more unique
– or at least that seems reasonable enough and congruent with how we measure
value. Hence, a perfect being would plausibly be unique.”

I’ve argued that basically all of Gel’s responses to my criticisms of his
original piece fail. I won’t, however, retrace all the steps I took in showing
this. I’m just too lazy for that at this point, lol. (Or should I say ‘IoI’?)

I’ve really enjoyed interacting with Gel, both in print and our private
messages. He is incredibly thoughtful, kind, and helpful, and I deeply
appreciate our friendship. While I have been critical of his rejoinders, none
of my criticisms are meant to tear down or destroy; they’re meant to serve all
of us in our collective pursuit of truth. I thank Gel for serving me in this
regard, and I hope to have served him (and you) likewise.

You could, of course, claim that the Father’s essence couldn’t be shared with
another _being_ but _could_ be shared with another, numerically distinct
reality (e.g., another divine person) that isn’t a different _being_. But—as
before—this response fails to engage the second criticism. The second
criticism is that the _same motivation for thinking that the Father’s essence
couldn’t be shared with another_ ** _being_** _equally motivates thinking that
the Father’s essence couldn’t be shared with another_ ** _person_** _._ If one
accepts that the Father’s essence couldn’t be shared with another _being_ on
the basis of the Gel-Feser-Aquinas argument, one should also accept that the
Father’s essence couldn’t be shared with another _person_ on the basis of the
parody argument.[15] It is not an option, then, to merely assert that the
essence is shareable in the latter way but not the former way; one must
address the epistemic symmetry between the cases.

(c) Gel’s proffered justification for premise (2) overlooks the distinction
between God’s being identical to existence _as such_ and God’s being identical
to _his own act of existence_.

Posted on [November 24,
2022](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2022/11/24/classical-theism-first-
causes-and-naturalism-a-response-to-enric-gel/ "4:27 pm") by  [Majesty Of
Reason](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/author/majestyofreason/ "View
all posts by Majesty Of Reason")

I couldn’t help but comment on Gel’s claim at the beginning of this section
that he’s “shown why Schmid’s defeaters fail”. He has shown no such thing—his
responses are fraught with problems.

Setting aside the lack of justification for premise (1) (as that was the topic
of the previous section), there are **two** problems with this justification.

There are **two** problems with this, however. **First** , the success of
Gel’s reply here relies on the success of Gel’s reply to my first criticism
(criticism (a)). But as I argued in the previous sub-section, Gel’s reply to
my first criticism fails, and hence his reply here fails. **Second** , in this
new context of Gel’s tripartite justification for premise (2), I view
criticism (b) as a way of filling out my first point in criticism (a). As I
argued therein, the success of Gel’s new (tripartite) justification
_presupposes_ the incompatibility of those other properties with being pure
esse,[9] and hence the argument cannot be used to _establish_ as much.

This argument doesn’t work. I actually address it in my forthcoming Springer
book _Existential Inertia and Classical Theistic Proofs_. I specifically
engage Feser’s articulation of the argument. Feser writes:

****You are commenting using your Twitter account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'twitter' \);) / Change
)

There are at least **three** things to say in response. **First** , even if
the argument is tweaked in this manner, the central problem remains: the
argument _assumes_ a principle _without adequate justification_ , and hence
the argument fails to establish its conclusion. Of course, Gel might point to
his preceding argument for IoI in support of IonI; but as I’ve explained, that
argument fails. (The argument fails by dint of ignoring _other ways_ (e.g.,
standard theory comparison) to rule out scenarios involving arbitrary numbers
of ordinary objects around us. The same is true when we consider not
_ordinary_ objects but _necessary_ objects—there are _other ways_ (e.g.,
standard theory comparison) to rule out scenarios involving chaotic, arbitrary
swathes of necessary objects.)

**First** , Gel is here resisting the need for individuating properties that
explain why the properties _rectangularity_ and _circularity_ are distinct.
And his resistance, it seems, is based on the fact that the properties in
question are self-evidently distinct and hence don’t need a further
explanation for their distinction. The problem with this rejoinder, though, is
that _substances are also self-evidently distinct from one another_. To see
this, notice that _p_ ’s self-evidence to subject S requires that S grasps the
natures of the things reported in _p_. (For instance, that Euclidean triangles
have interior angles summing to 180 degrees is not self-evident to my 2-year-
old nephew, since he lacks the relevant knowledge about the essences of
triangles, degrees, etc. But once one grasps the relevant natures or essences,
one thereby _sees_ the relevant truth. This is part of what it is to be _self-
evident_.) So, if S doesn’t grasp the natures of _rectangularity_ and
_circularity_ , their distinction won’t be self-evident to S. Gel’s response
therefore requires a background grasp of the natures of the realities in
question. But here’s the rub: with a background grasp of the natures of
indiscernible substances A and B, it is _also_ self-evident that A and B are
distinct. For part of the nature of any entity is that it is _that particular
entity, distinct from other particular entities._[4] Hence, upon grasping the
nature of A (say), we would immediately see that it’s distinct from B. But in
that case, Gel’s rejoinder here does more harm than good to his case, for his
rejoinder _also_ implies that there needn’t be any further explanation for the
distinction between _substances_ —in which case, my criticism of the
explicability-based motivation for IoI is vindicated.

But what matters for purposes of ontological parsimony is _what kinds we need
to characterize everything_. The theist and Oppyan naturalist alike need:
_necessary_ , _contingent_ , _caused_ , and _uncaused_. It’s a _draw_ with
respect to these. But, where the naturalist only needs _natural_ , **the
theist needs that _and then some_** : _perfect_ , _unlimited_ , etc. Sure,
there may be different _combinations_ of these kinds that the theist and
Oppyan naturalist commit to—e.g., the Oppyan naturalist commits to a
combination _necessary physical_ and _uncaused physical_ while the theist
doesn’t. But that doesn’t change the fact that the number of kinds to which
the naturalist is committed is a proper subset of those of the theist. Gel is
therefore mistaken in saying that the naturalist posits additional kinds.

[13.5] I’m setting aside here the seeming tension between (a) the divine
persons being identical to their unique, differentiating characteristics
(which are _not_ _shared_ among the persons) and (b) the divine persons being
identical to a _shared_ divine essence. For more on potential tensions between
Trinitarianism and DDS, see my experimental post
[here](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/01/15/some-short-quasi-
tensions-between-dds-and-trinitarianism/).

But it seems clear that there could only be one being which had the GSA-
property. For suppose there are two distinct gods, Alpha and Omega, which both
have the GSA-property. Because of that, Alpha and Omega would simultaneously
be causally dependent on each other, which is viciously circular – Alpha will
be creating Omega only insofar as Omega will be creating Alpha, but Omega will
be creating Alpha only insofar as Alpha will be creating Omega. So, at most
only one thing can have the GSA-property (Leftow (2012), 192-193). But if a
perfect being would plausibly have the GSA-property, it follows that there
could only be one perfect being.”

But Gel is mistaken in saying that “F could not be an essential property of A,
since in such a case B would exhibit F as well”. This illicitly assumes that
_A and B share the same essence or essential properties_. But nowhere does Gel
justify this. For all Gel’s argument shows, it could be that there are two
beings of pure esse, _each of which is identical to its own unshared essence_.
We need not suppose that they share one and the same essence; they may simply
have different essences. Perhaps one of them has an essence included in which
is the essential attribute of being trinitarian (or omnipotent, or omniscient,
or impassible), whereas the other has an essence included in which is the
essential attribute of being unitarian (or quasi-omnipotent, or quasi-
omniscient, or diff-impassible—cf. my footnote 7). In this case, each being is
identical to its own essence (and, we can suppose, its own existence, in which
case each being is a being of pure esse), and yet there is no single essence
that the beings share in common.

But there’s a rather clear problem with this: Gel _blithely asserts_ that A’s
identity to A’s _own_ existence amounts to A’s identity with existence _as
such_. Just read the passage again—carefully, slowly, with a critical eye.
_**There’s no argument for it**_ —it’s just asserted. Gel simply _asserts_
that A’s essence being identical to _existence as such_ follows from A’s being
identical to A’s _own_ act of existence. But _this is precisely the question
at issue_. No headway is made here by blithely asserting the very question at
issue. I was precisely demanding a _justification_ for this slide from
<identical to one’s _own_ act of existence> to <identical to existence _as
such_ >. Gel fails to offer any _inkling_ of a justification for this slide.

Gel alleges in his recent piece that this argument is invalid. This is false,
as I’ll explain below. Indeed, Gel himself—since the publication of his
paper—agrees that the argument is valid, as he’s said in his streams and in
personal correspondence.

Up next is Gel’s response to my trinitarian parody of his argument for
uniqueness.

There are two troubles with this argument.[14] As the problems appear in my
book:

(2) and (3) Minimizing indiscernible objects might be valuable as a merely
epistemic/theoretical virtue, but the point of my argument was that LL is a
metaphysical background assumption for hypothesis/explanation creation, not
just a component of it. I’m concerned that if you don’t view LL as a
necessary, inviolable truth, it seems arbitrary as to what objects you can
consider indiscernible and identical. What two indistinguishable things could,
in principle, not be considered identical? It seems that if we accept that two
things are (all else equal) indistinguishable, there’s nothing to prevent us
from saying they’re identical. Also, though I too like the concept of
autonomous (essentialist) facts, I don’t see the lack of explanation/grounding
of those facts as particularly relevant, since LL seems more concerned with
distinguishing autonomous facts and essences from one another.

In this section, Gel discusses my three criticisms of premise (2) of his
argument. Recall the argument as formulated in my original response piece:

Once again, this response just misses the point. The point is **not** that the
_ad intra_ differentiation that takes place within God makes it so that we
have more than one perfect being. The trinitarian parodies don’t rest on this
claim. That’s just not the point. The point is that the reasons for thinking
that there cannot be _ad extra_ differentiation among **beings** _equally
justifies_ thinking that there likewise cannot be _ad intra_ differentiation
among **persons**. No one is claiming that the _ad intra_ differentiation
within God makes it so that we have more than one perfect being. This is
**totally irrelevant** to the point of the parodies.

(2) I might be fine, in the end, with the minimization of indiscernible
objects being a theoretical virtue (or at least supervening on something else
that’s a theoretical virtue), at least assuming that there can be no
explanation of why indiscernible objects are distinct. [I say ‘might’ because
I’m actually not sure whether facts of identity and distinction even *can* be
explained in the first place — I flirt with the idea that they’re ‘autonomous
facts’ in Shamik Dasgupta’s (2016) sense.] What I’m most resistant to is
treating IoI as a necessary, inviolable truth (as Leibniz, Aquinas, Gel, and
many thomists more generally seem to do).

****You are commenting using your Facebook account. ( [Log
Out](javascript:HighlanderComments.doExternalLogout\( 'facebook' \);) / Change
)

[12] I know Gel himself doesn’t necessarily endorse this footnote, since he
simply says “maybe the Trinitarian would” take this route. But I think it’s
important to address nonetheless, since the route fails.

Those not up to date on the dialectic are advised to read the relevant papers;
though, absent that, Gel’s section “In previous papers…” will get you
reasonably caught up.

But here Gel seems to confuse including different _**entities**_ in their
ontologies with having different _**theoretical characterizations**_ of a
**single** entity present in **both** ontologies. Both classical theism and
Oppyan naturalism include the initial singularity. Sure, they _characterize_
it differently—for the Oppyan naturalist, it’s necessary, while for the
classical theist, it’s contingent. But the _entity itself_ is included in both
ontologies. (Compare: the historically informed atheist and the Christian both
believe that Jesus existed—the entity, Jesus, is in both their ontologies—even
though their _characterizations_ of Jesus diverge.) So the point about proper
subsets and simplicity stands. The classical theist, minimally, has
{Necessary(God), Contingent(initial singularity), Contingent(non-initial
states)}, whereas the Oppyan naturalist only has {Necessary(initial
singularity), Contingent(non-initial states)}. In terms of ontological
commitments, naturalism is clearly simpler here.[20]

Consider the GSA*-property: x has the GSA*-property iff, for any y distinct
from x, x and only x is y’s (continued) source. Plausibly, the GSA*-property
is either a perfection or a constituent of other perfections. Why think this?
First, consider that ‘[b]eing a potential ultimate source of some proportion
of what benefits things is a good property to have’ (Leftow (2012), 22). But x
being the ultimate source of _everything_ that benefits _anything_ distinct
from x __ would be the maximal degree of this good property, and hence, given
that ‘a property is a perfection iff it is the maximal degree of a degreed
good attribute to have’ (Leftow (2012), 22), x being the ultimate source of
everything that benefits anything distinct from x is a perfection of x. Now,
such a perfection supervenes on the GSA*-property – and so, either the
GSA*-property, by a plausible supervenience principle, is itself a perfection
or it is a necessary condition of a perfection. In either case, a perfect
person will have the GSA*-property (since a perfect person has every
perfection essentially, by definition).

**First** , Gel illicitly assumes that A having F and B lacking F entails that
A is pure being _plus_ feature F. But this is simply untrue—or, at least, it’s
entirely unmotivated. In principle, it could easily be the case that A’s pure
esse _just is_ A’s F-ness, while B’s pure _esse_ _just is_ B’s G-ness, where
F-ness isn’t G-ness. This is kinda similar to how, for the classical theist,
God’s pure esse _just is_ God’s omnipotence. It’s not as though God is pure
esse _plus_ omnipotence; God’s pure esse _just is_ his omnipotence. The same
can be said in the case of A and F—it’s not as though A is pure being _plus_
F-ness; A (and A’s pure esse) _just is_ A’s F-ness. And B is differentiated
from A by dint of B (and B’s pure esse) being identical to G-ness, which is
distinct from F-ness. Here, A and B are discernible: F-ness is a feature A has
(and, indeed, is identical to) that B lacks, while G-ness here is a feature B
has (and, indeed, is identical to) that A lacks, and such features
differentiate them.[7] Furthermore, each of A and B is pure esse. But then A’s
being pure esse _plus_ feature F doesn’t follow from the facts that A has F, B
lacks F, and A and B are each beings of pure esse. I’m not claiming that this
sort of scenario is metaphysically possible; my point is simply that Gel needs
to _rule it out_ for his argument to succeed, and yet he has done no such
thing.

(b) There are candidate differentiating features that might obtain between
beings of pure esse; and

Again, I don’t think this is right. We can do perfectly well without IoI here
by simply applying the standard theoretical virtues to hypotheses about the
number of pencils on the table. The hypothesis that there’s only one pencil on
the table far outcompetes the other hypotheses in terms of theoretical
virtues. First, the hypothesis H1 that there’s just one pencil explains all
the relevant data—the slight forces on the table and the rest of the physical
objects in your vicinity, your perceptual experiences _as of_ at least one
pencil, and so on. So, among the hypotheses about the number of pencils on
your table, H1 is unsurpassed in its explanatory power. Second, the other
hypotheses introduce intolerable explanatory costs in the mystery engendered
by their postulation of precise, arbitrary numbers of pencils.[2] So, H1 is
not only _unsurpassed_ in its explanatory power but _far surpasses_ the other
hypotheses therein. Third, H1 is far _simpler_ than the other hypotheses
because it minimizes ontological commitment. So, H1 far surpasses other
hypotheses in both explanatory power and simplicity—in which case, we have
_excellent_ reason to accept H1.[3]

The dialectic here is focused on premise (1) of Gel’s argument (as I
formulated it in my original response piece), which is an application of the
Identity of Indiscernibles (IoI):

[10] For an explication of the objection, see either p. 7 of my original
response piece or Gel’s quotation thereof in his recent piece.

Consider now that a perfect person would plausibly possess supreme or absolute
value. But something is more valuable in the same measure as it is more unique
– or at least that seems reasonable enough and congruent with how we measure
value. The _less_ unique a perfect person is – i.e., _the_ _greater the
number_ of perfect persons – the _less_ value it has. Hence, a perfect person
would plausibly be unique. There cannot, in other words, be more than one
perfect person.

So, I don’t know what “possessing the fullness of being” even means. Alas,
insofar as it means anything, the justification here fails for the same reason
as above, since A’s possessing the fullness of being could—for all Gel has
shown—partly _consist in_ A’s being identical to its F-ness while B’s
possessing the fullness of being could partly _consist in_ B’s being identical
to its G-ness. Here, there’s nothing _superadded_ to A’s or B’s fullness of
being, and hence Gel is mistaken to say that a differentiating feature between
two things that are the “fullness of being” would amount to something
superadded to their “fullness of being”.

[4] This doesn’t imply that any distinct substances are discernible in the
sense required for IoI, since such essential truths (about being _that
particular_ _substance_ ) needn’t correspond to _properties_ of substances.

Now, Gel construes my second point as “Schmid’s objection to IoI”, but this
could use more precision. My objection targets _not_ IoI but _a central
reason—explicability—leveled **on behalf of** IoI_. For explication of the
objection, see either my original response piece or the quotation thereof in
Gel’s recent piece. Gel has **two** responses to my objection, and I’ll
consider each in turn.

Gel does say something about a potential trinitarian parody, but what he says
suffers from the same problem as his reply in the previous section. Gel writes
(in footnote 26):

“Consider also that it seems to follow from the notion of a perfect being that
it could not have a superior, that nothing could be greater in perfection than
it. But there is also a case to be made that ‘there cannot be something wholly
distinct from [God] and as great as He is’ (Leftow (2012), 207) – that is,
that a perfect being could not have an equal. Indeed, it seems greater to be
unmatched in perfection than not to be. As Leftow puts it, ‘[i]t would be
greater to be intrinsically such as to be the greatest possible being among
commensurable rivals than not to be. No constellation of attributes could
confer more perfection than one that made one thus greatest’ (ibid.). Hence,
it seems to follow once more that a perfect being would plausibly be unique –
it would have no superior and no equal.”

Given this, it seems pointless to ask for a deeper, explicability-based reason
for why we can’t individuate properties but *can* individuate substances. This
distinction between properties and substances seems to be as deep as our
metaphysics can go.

**_Gel, “Trinitarian trouble?” — Or, my trinitarian parody of the earlier
argument from (1)–(5)_**

Consider also that it seems to follow from the notion of a perfect person that
it could not have a superior, that nothing could be greater in perfection than
it. But there is also a case to be made that there cannot be something
distinct from a perfect person and as great as that person – that is, that a
perfect person could not have an equal. Indeed, it seems greater to be
unmatched in perfection than not to be. To modify Leftow, it would be greater
to be intrinsically such as to be the greatest possible person among
commensurable rivals than not to be. No constellation of attributes could
confer more perfection than one that made one thus greatest. Hence, it seems
to follow once more that a perfect person would plausibly be unique – it would
have no superior and no equal.

Aside from the identical nature of the balls, the circumstances are
indeterminate as to whether these two objects I saw during the day are the
same. I develop two different hypotheses as to how the balls got there, with
one hypothesis assuming they’re different and another assuming they’re the
same. However, the first hypothesis says that the neighbor’s kid had the
silver ball stolen by another kid who took it into the woods. The second says
that the neighbor’s kid has his own ball and another kid was in the woods with
a different but identical ball. These hypotheses seem equally complex, with
the difference being that one posits an additional ball belonging to a
different kid while the other posits a kid with a motive to steal the one
ball. Suppose after a lot of data collection later, my two hypotheses are
still equally in the number of postulated entities, events, and processes.

Gel claims (in footnote 13) that he “was mainly relying on” Kerr’s principle
that whatever is distinct from _esse tantum_ is either (i) subject to _esse
tantum_ or (ii) nothing. Now, what Gel _actually said_ doesn’t bear much
resemblance to this principle (e.g., Gel said **nothing** about being subject
to _esse tantum_ ; Gel talked about being “outside of” rather than _distinct
from_ , and if we replace Gel’s “outside of” with “distinct from”, his claim
is clearly false; etc.), and Gel also didn’t cite Kerr at this juncture in his
original piece. But set that aside, since this principle won’t help Gel’s
justification for premise (2). For if there were more than one _esse_ _tantum_
or being of pure _esse_ , this principle implies neither that any of these
beings would be subject to one another nor that any of them would be nothing.

**Second** , we should keep in mind that the onus in the dialectical context
at hand is on _Gel_ to justify IonI, since _Gel_ is the one offering an
argument one of whose premises assumes IonI. Thus, _even if_ there are no
reasons to question IonI, what matters for present purposes is whether Gel has
offered good reasons to _accept_ IonI. And, as I’ve explained, he hasn’t.

We should clarify at the outset that my objection was not that we need to
accept primitive individuation at any and all levels.[5] My objection was
simply that primitive individuation seems unavoidable _at some level_. And in
that case, the explicability motivation for IoI—which seeks to _avoid_
primitive individuation altogether—is mistaken. Now, in response to _this_
point, Gel suggests restricting IoI to substances. Setting aside the seemingly
_ad hoc_ nature of this restriction, my criticism still stands in another
guise: namely, it provides an _undercutting defeater_ for the explicability-
based motivation for the restricted IoI. Once we grant that there is primitive
individuation (even among properties), we seem to lose any compelling
explicability-based reason for thinking that primitive individuation among
substances is impossible. (What’s the relevant difference between substances
and properties in virtue of which the former, but not the latter, cannot be
primitively individuated? For me, no answer presents itself upon reflection.)
Of course, one could appeal to some _other_ reason, apart from the
explicability-based one I canvassed in my paper; but then one is no longer
responding to my objection, since my objection simply concerned the
explicability-based motivation for IoI.

[15] See the preceding section for more on how the trinitarian parody
criticism works.

Gel claims that in order to validly infer (8a) (i.e., (3)), my (1) and (2)
would have to be understood as (6a) and (7a). But, according to Gel, “in
order… to be true to [Gel’s original] unicity argument”, my (2) would have to
be understood in the sense of _ad extra_ differentiation, i.e., (7b) as
opposed to (7a). But again, this just misses the point. I wasn’t trying to be
“true to” Gel’s original unicity argument. I was pointing out that _the same
motivations_ for thinking Gel’s _original_ premise in terms of _ad extra_
differentiation among **beings** _equally motivate_ my _new_ premise—i.e., (2)
or (7a)—in terms of _ad intra_ differentiation among **divine persons**. The
point was never to **follow** Gel’s application to _ad extra_ differentiation;
the point was to emphasize that the _motivations_ for accepting Gel’s premise
about _ad extra_ differentiation _equally motivate_ accepting a _different_
premise about _ad intra_ differentiation, and hence if one accepts the former,
one should also accept the latter. In other words, if we should accept Gel’s
premise about _ad extra_ differentiation, we should _also_ accept _my new_
premise about _ad intra_ differentiation, given the epistemic symmetry
discussed earlier.[13] **This** is the point.

**Second** , an equally (im)plausible parody argument can be run which shows
that any being of pure esse couldn’t be trinitarian. In order for there to be
more than one divine person, they’d have to be differentiated by some feature
that one has which the others lack; but then that divine person wouldn’t be
pure esse but would be pure esse _plus that feature_. But then the divine
person couldn’t be God, since God is pure esse. (Furthermore, the divine
person would be a composite of pure esse _and that feature_ , and hence there
would be something composite intrinsic to God, which is incompatible with
DDS.) (NB: I respond below to what Gel says regarding trinitarian parodies.)

Gel goes on to disambiguate my premises based on whether they’re talking about
divine persons being the _**same**_ being of pure esse or _**different
beings**_ of pure esse.[11] But, first, none of this is relevant to the
central point about epistemic symmetry. The symmetry discussed above remains
regardless of whether they’re the same being of pure esse. Second, I
appreciate the disambiguation, since clarity is king; but I thought it was
already clear that I had in mind Gel’s (6a), (7a), and (8a) interpretations of
(1), (2), and (3) in my parody argument, since every competent contributor to
the relevant debate knows that the divine persons aren’t construed as
different _beings_ (as in (6b), (7b), and (8b)), and hence I thought it was
already clear in my premises and discussion thereof that I had (6a), (7a), and
(8a) in mind. And once we have (6a), (7a), and (8a) as the understanding of
(1), (2), and (3), the parody is perfectly valid. (And the argument _was
always_ perfectly valid, since—as I just pointed out—(1)-(3) were always
intended as (6a)-(8a).) So Gel’s criticism that my parody argument is invalid
is mistaken. It remains valid, as Gel himself has since agreed.

Criticism (c): Gel’s proffered justification for premise (2) overlooks the
distinction between God’s being identical to existence _as such_ and God’s
being identical to _God’s own act of existence_

[2] In addition to the arbitrary and unexplained precise number of pencils
postulated, there is a _lot_ more mystery that such hypotheses engender—i.e.,
they raise countless unanswered explanatory questions: Where did all those
additional pencils come from? Why are they all perfectly co-located, and how
are they able to remain perfectly co-located throughout their various changes
and interactions with the environment? Why isn’t there interference between
them? And so on _ad nauseam_. (These questions aren’t, of course,
_unanswerable_ ; but adding answers thereto will drastically increase the
complexity of such hypotheses.)

Consider also that the GSA*-property, together with the ability to freely
exercise one’s own sourcing power, constitutes the property of having complete
control over everything else. But it is good to have power over the existence
of everything else. Power over existence is degreed. Complete power over the
existence of everything else is its maximum, and so plausibly a perfection. In
this case, the GSA*-property is a constituent of another perfection, and so a
perfect person would have the GSA*-property.

Beginning with the **first point,** Gel offers in his recent piece a new
argument for IoI.[1] It is entirely fair and appropriate to include a new
argument for IoI at this juncture in the dialectic. We should at least note,
however, that Gel’s argument in his original piece was underdeveloped and
unjustified on account of assuming IoI, and so the central point in my
original response to Gel’s argument stands. Alas, with an argument for IoI on
the table, let’s evaluate it.

**Third** , Gel says he can think of no reason to question IonI. But I can
think of several. I’ll briefly give one for purposes of space: two
indiscernible necessary things at least seem coherently _conceivable_. And if
conceivability is defeasible evidence for possibility (as most philosophers
seem to think), then—since IonI entails that it is impossible for there to be
two indiscernible necessary things—we have defeasible reason to think IonI is
false.

Thought experiment: Suppose I’m driving out of my house to the store and see a
foot-wide, silver rubber ball lying in front of a neighbor’s yard. I assume
the ball belongs to the neighbor’s kid. Several hours later, I’m out on a walk
in the woods and I see a rubber ball that looks just like the other ball
except it’s in a different location. I drive back to my house and notice that
the silver ball I saw earlier at my neighbor’s is gone. Moreover, I have
background info about my neighborhood informing me that the neighbor’s kid
doesn’t like to leave his house, so he couldn’t have taken it into the woods.

I conclude, then, that my third criticism of premise (2) stands. Thus, **all
three** of my criticisms of premise (2) stand. Gel’s responses to each
criticism fail.

“Once we grant that there is primitive individuation (even among properties),
we seem to lose any compelling explicability-based reason for thinking that
primitive individuation among substances is impossible. (What’s the relevant
difference between substances and properties in virtue of which the former,
but not the latter, cannot be primitively individuated? For me, no answer
presents itself upon reflection.)”

[17] I’m sympathetic with some of them, in fact. Though, as I will argue
below, if we accept them, we should reject trinitarianism.

Nevertheless, it does seem like there’s still an indeterminacy problem for
hypotheses if we don’t accept LL. If we’re going with coherent conceivability
as a guide to prima facie possibility, then it certainly seems conceivable
that there could be two hypotheses that (1) diverge in their accounts of two
indiscernible objects (ie one hypothesis says that the objects are identical
and the other says they’re different) but (2) are equally-complex in the
entities and processes postulated.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fmajestyofreason.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F11%2F24%2Fclassical-theism-first-causes-and-naturalism-a-response-to-enric-gel%2F&signup_flow=account)

These responses also take care of Gel’s ensuing discussion involving pine
trees and whatnot.

Notice that _none_ of this makes use of IoI or any principle like IoI, and
notice, further, that the reasoning extends to hypotheses about basically any
other object in our ordinary experience. Hence, Gel is mistaken in saying that
without IoI or something very much like it, we would be in the dark about how
many objects we ordinarily encounter.

“[C]onsider that F is a perfection if it is ‘objectively and intrinsically
such that something F is more worthy of respect, admiration, honor, or awe
than something not F, _ceteris paribus_ ’ (Leftow (2012), 178). But it seems
that something unique is more worthy of respect, admiration, honor, or awe
than something not unique. Hence, being unique seems to be a perfection. But
there does not appear to be any incompatibility with being unique and other
properties a perfect being ought to have. Hence, we can say that, plausibly, a
perfect being would be unique.”

“Does this reasoning conflict with Trinitarianism? If unicity is a perfection
that any perfect being ought to have, some will say, then for a divine person
to really be divine (and hence, perfect) it would also have to be unique. And
so, the same intuitions would support the conclusion that there can only be
one divine person. But at least the traditional account of the Trinity
presented above can easily deal with this objection. The _ad intra_
differentiation that takes place within God does not make it so that now we
have more than _one_ perfect being, and each divine person is still perfect in
being identical to one and the same perfect substance, God.”

Gel’s second argument for God’s unicity derives from perfection. Gel’s
strategy here—following Leftow—is to show either that _uniqueness itself_ is a
perfection or that uniqueness is _entailed_ by something that’s a perfection.
Since a perfect being has every perfection essentially, it follows that a
perfect being would be unique. As Gel points out, this reasoning holds for
both classical and non-classical theistic models of God.

Gel then proceeds to offer a new justification for premise (2).[6] It is
entirely fair and appropriate to include a new justification at this juncture
in the dialectic. We should at least note, however, that we’re no longer
talking about Gel’s justification in his original piece, and so my original
response to Gel’s justification—to wit, that it doesn’t work—stands. Alas,
with a new justification proffered, let’s evaluate it.

**Second** , for Gel’s arguments in this section of his paper to succeed, he
has to add to the core hypothesis of theism various claims about value (e.g.,
which properties are perfections), claims about the reliability of our
intuitions concerning which properties are necessarily great-making, claims
about the proper methodology of PBT (as we saw above), claims about the
conditions under which we’re epistemically entitled to infer P is a perfection
(as we saw above), and so on. But adding postulates to one’s theory increases
its complexity, and hence even if Gel purchases some explanatory power with
respect to the number of first causes by adding such postulates, it’s not at
all clear whether this offsets the incurred cost of added complexity.

Criticism (b): There are candidate differentiating features that might obtain
between beings of pure esse

[16] I address other common internet classical theist talking points—such as
the clearly false claim that DDS best solves the Euthyphro problem—in my two-
part video series “Arguments for Classical Theism”. Here’s [Part
1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-bJkTg_Z_hw&list=PLxRhaLyXxXka0E9laGDA83gN2UbQoa4F2&index=1)
and [Part
2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=idma_oyto7M&list=PLxRhaLyXxXka0E9laGDA83gN2UbQoa4F2&index=2).

My response in _Religious Studies_ , “[Naturalism, classical theism, and first
causes](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/religious-
studies/article/naturalism-classical-theism-and-first-
causes/C8B373E5EA8C6AC0D386DD247AB92803)” = **my original response piece**

Now, at the outset, I want to emphasize that Gel’s argument here— _if_
successful—illustrates the folly of much of internet classical theist
rhetoric. It’s a commonly parroted point among internet classical theists that
only divine simplicity allows us to secure monotheism or God’s uniqueness (or,
equivalently: if divine simplicity is false, then there could in principle be
more than one God). Feser (2017, p. 189) makes this claim (without offering
_any_ justification thereof—something internet classical theists also never
do), and it’s a talking point among countless others. If Gel’s argument here
succeeds, hopefully this confused and hopelessly myopic talking point is put
to rest.[16]

Gel concludes by saying, “Also, further considerations about perfection could
support the case that the one and only perfect being should be, internally
speaking, more than one person (see, again, Sijuwade (2021)).”

Regarding my point on atemporal wavefunction monism, Gel writes: “Surely,
atemporal wavefunction monism is an interesting view on its own right. Still,
as a hypothetical example of a purely actual material thing, _in the
Aristotelian-Thomistic sense of ‘material’ with which I was operating_ , it is
bound to be incoherent.” I find this response odd, since I don’t see any
indication in Gel’s original piece that he was employing the Aristotelian-
Thomistic sense of ‘material’. For starters, Gel didn’t articulate how he was
using ‘material’ anywhere in his article. Moreover, at this stage in the
dialectic of his original piece, he was considering what a _naturalist_ who
accepts a purely actual first cause would be committed to. And the naturalist—
_qua_ naturalist—is **not** committed to the Aristotelian-Thomistic
understanding of ‘material’. At the very least, Gel should have _specified_ in
his original piece that by ‘material’, he means the _Aristotelian-Thomistic_
sense thereof. He did no such thing, and so I had to supply my own
understanding by employing that conditional phrase (“ ** _if_** we understand
‘material’ and ‘physical’ to be synonymous…”).

Now, one might object that we can simply run essentially the same reasoning
for classical theism. In particular, granting that there’s a being of pure
esse, wouldn’t the hypothesis that there’s only _one_ such being far
outcompete the other hypotheses about their number? _Yes!_ (Or, at least,
_probably_!) But, first, this isn’t an _explanation_ for why there is only one
being of pure esse. What we have here is simply _good epistemic reason to
think_ that there is only one. Second, _the Oppyan naturalist can make exactly
the same move_ —i.e., the Oppyan naturalist can hold that there’s only one
first cause on precisely the same grounds of theoretical virtue. The classical
theist therefore doesn’t enjoy an advantage over the Oppyan naturalist here.

I conclude, then, that Gel has failed to assuage the two worries I raised
surrounding IoI in my original response piece. **Both** of my original
criticisms stand. Let’s now turn to Gel’s next subsection.

[9] Since the compatibility therewith undergirds the criticism that Gel fails
to rule out a scenario wherein pure esse A is identical to its F-ness while
pure esse B is identical to its G-ness, etc. See the previous sub-section for
this.

At the outset, Gel seems to _grant_ that his original justification for
premise (2) is sketchy at best, as he grants the fairness of my criticism
concerning his ‘outside of’ locution.

**Footnotes** can be found at the end of each (sub)section in which they
appear in sections called “ ** _Section footnotes_** “. I recommend **reading
the footnotes** , as they contain important information! 🙂

Let’s turn, first, to the ontological status of moments of time. Non-
relativistic presentist, eternalist, growing block, and moving spotlight
accounts are easy to come by. Although Newtonian/Galilean space-times are
typically characterized under the assumption that eternalism is true,[3] our
discussion of Newtonian/Galilean space-times made no such assumption.
(Moreover, nothing in our Newtonian/Galilean inertial theses assumes
eternalism.) Therefore, our Newtonian/Galilean inertial theses are applicable
in the context of Newtonian/Galilean versions of presentism, eternalism,
growing block theory, and moving spotlight theory. Whether adequate
relativistic versions of presentism, growing block theory, or moving spotlight
theory can be constructed is more controversial, but to the extent that such
accounts _can_ be constructed, nothing in our relativistic inertial theses
prevents their adoption. And so EIT is consistent with presentism, eternalism,
growing block, and moving spotlight.

[22] Ingthorsson (2021; Forthcoming) gives a causal interaction account of
both constitution and persistence, arguing that the continued unity (and,
hence, existence) of composite temporal concrete objects is explained
internally by the continuous and dynamic glue-like interactions of their
parts. Thus, Ingthorsson writes:

One problem with this is that, just left at that, it doesn’t really amount to
much of an objection. For in the case of the chemical constituents, there are
chemical facts we can point to that explain exactly _why_ they will together
generate something red. But Schmid does not tell us _exactly what it is_ about
prime matter and substantial form that would (or indeed _could_ ), when they
are combined, generate a tendency to persist in existence. (2021)

If, in order to continually exist, something must continually participate in a
cause of its existence, then it does not inertially persist.

Perhaps friends of simultaneous causation could instead object by appealing to
empirically indistinguishable alternatives to relativity that reinstate
absolute time. If absolute time can be reinstated, then the intuitive notion
of causes concurring with their effects can be reinstated. For our purposes in
this post, we make two observations. First, alternatives to relativity remain
deeply controversial. So long as relativistic orthodoxy remains a live option,
the possibility that causes do not concur with their effects remains a live
option. And, for that reason, transtemporal accounts of existential inertia
remain live. Second, the objection concerns alternatives to relativity that
are empirically indistinguishable from relativity, at least within some
domain. In any case in relativity’s domain of application where we can detect
a relationship between a cause and an effect, theories that are empirically
indistinguishable from relativity must have the same observational
consequences as relativity. Thus, within relativity’s domain of application,
insofar as relativity suggests that causes temporally precede their effects,
any observationally indistinguishable alternative to relativity will suggest
that causes temporally precede their effects.

Positive destruction of perduring objects in Galilean/Newtonian space-time: to
positively destroy a t-temporal part of O is to actively prevent this
t-temporal part from existing (such that the t-temporal part would have
existed had the active prevention not occurred). So: to destroy a t-temporal
part of O is to act on one or more temporal parts of O in some interval [t’,
t), where t’ < t, so as to actively prevent the existence of O’s t-temporal
part.[8]

But it is possible for x to go out of existence (at least if caused to do so,
as EIT says).

Thus, if no positive reality[4] causally destroys O from [t, t’] for any t’ >
t, O will persist from [t, t’]. But this is just to say that _EIT is true_.
According to EIT, temporal objects persist without external sustenance so long
as they aren’t positively destroyed. We already saw that the mere absence of
sustenance couldn’t be an ‘already actual cause’ of O cessation at any time t’
later than t. Thus, so long as no positive reality comes along and positively
destroys O, O will persist to t’ even in the absence of sustenance from
without. So, CP seems straightforwardly to entail EIT.

Laws of nature that govern or otherwise explain the evolution of systems
and/or objects over time (à la law-based accounts);

It is necessary to alleviate some immediate, potential counterexamples to EIT
before considering more substantive criticisms of EIT found in the literature.
Consider first a violinist’s musical sounds. If the violinist stops playing,
presumably the musical sounds stop existing as well. Isn’t this a
counterexample to EIT’s claim that things don’t have sustaining or conserving
causes?

[21] Note that these suggestions are _not_ (necessarily) suggestions that a
proper part of something is the efficient (sustaining) cause of the whole of
which it is a component. Rather, I’m talking about one part of something
explaining why it is _conjoined or unified_ with the other parts of the thing.
At least _prima facie_ , this seems like it could provide an explanation of a
composite thing’s existence without adducing an (external) efficient cause of
the existence of the composite thing. _Prima facie_ , we could simply appeal
to the explanation of the unity or conjoined-ness of the parts—in conjunction
with the principle that a whole exists if its parts are unified or conjoined
in the relevant way—in order to explain the existence of the composite object.
This does not adduce an outside/external sustaining efficient cause of the
very being of the whole composite object. (And this is precisely the kind of
cause that Feser tries to infer in his argument, since the classical theistic
God would clearly be an external/outside sustaining efficient cause of
composite objects.)

In its defense, I will draw on Merricks’ (2019) recent argument for monism as
well as the insights in Loux (2012). Here is the argument for (26):

[3] Even if one wants to affirm that the neo-classical God’s existence is
explained in terms of God’s _perfection_ or _necessary existence_ or some
such, we can simply focus on _that further fact_ about God which explains
God’s existence and which is uniquely unexplained. Nothing in my argument
hangs on this.

Moreover—and note that we do not need to do this for our criticism to
succeed—here is a plausible _positive justification_ of why something like (i)
and (ii) **_do_** suffice to explain S’s existence at m. For S to **_fail_**
to exist at m despite existing from [m*, m), where m* < m, is for some
**_change_** to occur. But a change occurs only if some factor causally
induces said change. Hence, if no factor causally induces a change, then the
change won’t occur. Thus, if no factor causally induces S to fail to exist at
m despite existing from [m*, m), then S exists at m. Once we add that nothing
came along to causally induce this—that is, once we add that nothing came
along to destroy S from m* to m—it simply follows that S exists at m.

Now, you might be wondering, “But Joe, doesn’t Feser offer a pretty powerful
argument from change _for_ act-potency pluralism? How you engage that
argument? It’s pretty relevant in this context.”

Thus, saying that such continuously occurring real (accidental) changes
require causes is crucially different from saying that the very _substantial
being_ of the object _as such_ requires a continuously operative efficient
sustaining cause. Those continuous real changes only demand continuously
operative causes that merely _modify_ the accidental features of the object.
But this is wholly separate from the need for an efficient sustaining cause of
the entire object’s existence at every moment at which it exists (or at every
time at which it has a temporal part).[35]

[Fn] I’m here using “natural” in the sense that many classical theists use it
(as in Feser (2014, pp. 258-261)). In this sense, “S is naturally F” means
(roughly) that F-ness is proper to or characteristic of the kind of thing S
is. It does not mean whatever belongs to that kind must—as a matter of
metaphysical necessity—be F in order to fall within the kind.

Now, perhaps you think a necessary concrete object must be _purely actual_ and
hence timeless (and hence not within EIT’s quantificational domain). But this
is straightforwardly false: there could easily be a non-purely actual,
necessarily existent being. Its potencies must simply be potencies merely for
_accidental_ (rather than substantial) change (or else mere _cross-world
variance_ in properties).

However, this proposal encounters a series of problems. For example, FLRW
space-times require that the distribution of matter-energy within the universe
is homogeneous and isotropic. The matter-energy density increases dramatically
between points outside and points inside the Earth; clearly, our universe is
not homogeneous and isotropic. Instead, our universe is only homogeneous and
isotropic _on average_.[4] But endurance was supposed to be a theory about the
persistence of material objects and not a theory that held true only for the
large-scale statistical properties of the universe.

[4] At the very least, nothing Nemes says gives the inertialist any reason to
_abandon_ this explanatory principle, which is what he would _need_ to do for
his argument against EIT to have teeth.

[1] Here, I mean ‘events’ as understood in the metaphysics literature. In
relativistic physics, an ‘event’ is standardly defined as a space-time point.
I shall also assume for simplicity that concrete objects are not _themselves_
events (or mere collections thereof).

But reality isn’t simple. Complications arise. Different authors characterize
the thesis differently. We’ll explore those below. For the next few
paragraphs, I just want to give you a sense of what EIT says and what it
doesn’t say.

Feser’s central argument against EIT derives from the Principle of
Proportionate Causality (PPC), according to which a total cause cannot give to
an effect what it does not have to give in the first place. More precisely,
the PPC holds that whatever exists in an effect E must exist in the total
cause of E in some manner (formally, virtually, or eminently). With this
principle in hand, Feser argues:

To drive this point home, consider again Explanandum, Transtemporal Explanans,
and No-change Explanans from earlier:

The basic idea is this. Consider a collection of particles of type _P_ which
constitute water at time _t_. Though they actually constitute water at _t_ ,
there is nothing in the particles _qua particles of type P_ that suffices to
make them water rather than one of the other alternatives mentioned. Again,
_qua particles of type P_ they have the potential to constitute water, or
separate quantities of hydrogen and oxygen, or some other substance or
aggregate of substances. So, there must at _t_ be something distinct from the
collection which actualizes its potential to be _water_ , specifically.

[23] For a recent defense of an existential inertialist view on which the
foundational temporal reality is a collection of enduring mereological
simples, see Benocci (2018).

Yet another point worth emphasizing here is that EIT only quantifies over
temporal concrete objects _or some subset thereof_. Thus, even if sculptures,
people, and other macroscopic physical objects require outside sustaining
causes of their existence, this would in no way invalidate EIT. For this says
nothing about (say) the _foundational_ layer of reality (whether it be
naturalist-friendly (e.g., one or more fields, or the universal wavefunction,
or a collection of fundamental particles, or a collection of mereological
simples, or whatever) or theist-friendly (e.g., the neo-classical or
panentheistic God)).

According to these non-classical theistic views, only finite, limited,
imperfect, contingent things cry out for further explanation. But this cry is
entirely silenced when we consider an infinite, unlimited, perfect, necessary
being. There is no mystery as to why such a being is uniquely unexplainable,
and there are principled, independent reasons for thinking as much—reasons
entirely separate from considerations about the essence-existence distinction.
Aquinas’s principle, then, is impotent to establish that an infinite,
unlimited, perfect, necessary being requires a cause by dint of its being an
essence-existence composite. For, again, it is clear that such a being
_couldn’t_ have a further explanation. And as Kerr points out, Aquinas applies
his principle precisely to account for those facts that _do_ require further
explanation.[5]

Here’s a reply. Just as the primitivist can say that their nomological
primitives are outside of space-time and so do not persist in time, so, too,
friends of the DTA account can say that their necessitation relations are
outside of space-time and so do not persist in time. As we’ve said, our aim in
this post is to examine alternative accounts of persistence; our aim is not to
rebut every possible argument for classical theism. Whether or not classical
theism can offer a superior account of the necessitation relation is, again,
beyond the scope of this post.

In general, then, it seems that any proposal for explaining the unity of the
distinct Trinitarian persons will undercut NPCP and _a fortiori_ the Neo-
Platonic proof.

[2] Events as standardly understood within relativistic physics—that is,
space-time points—are not good candidates for entities that persist over time
either, because space-time points are not typically thought to either perdure
or endure in Galilean or Minkowski space-time (Dasgupta 2015; Maudlin 2012,
pp. 54-66; Gilmore 2008, p. 1226).

[26] For a variety of arguments for at least one necessarily existent concrete
object, see Pruss and Rasmussen (2018). See especially ch. 9, wherein
arguments for the impossibility of necessary concreta are addressed.

I discuss existential inertia in at least five videos: (a) [A User’s
Guide](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jr44d_1_sGk), (b) Response videos to
Intellectual Conservatism ([Part
1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5dG1HbbFRfI) and [Part
2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k3pn4QCPFtI)), (c) the end of [my
discussion with Oppy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ybUW693C8UY) on the
nature and purpose of arguments, (d) [Arguments for Classical Theism | Part
1/2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-bJkTg_Z_hw).

_Neo-Platonic Causal Principle (NPCP)_ : Any composite object requires a
sustaining efficient cause of its existence—that is, an outside or external
cause that concurrently combines the parts together to constitute the object.

Furthermore, inertial theses should plausibly remain neutral on concrete
objects’ dependence on abstract objects. Suppose, for instance, that temporal
concrete objects like people, particles, and platypuses have a range of
essential properties, and suppose further that they have such properties in
virtue of exemplifying or instantiating the relevant abstract universals.
Finally, suppose that such abstract universals are not _parts_ of the concrete
objects in question. In the case at hand, one might think that temporal
concrete objects ontologically depend on numerically distinct, non-constituent
objects. Thus, in order to avoid entanglement with debates concerning abstract
objects, I advise that inertial theses only deny that temporal concrete
objects ontologically depend on numerically distinct, non-part _concrete_
objects. And notice that once we put the requirement this way, we’ve no longer
worded the requirement in terms of concurrence, and so the requirement is
perfectly suited for inertial theses applicable to relativistic space-times.

Before articulating this problem in more detail, let’s get a clear
understanding of pluralism and its rival, _monism_. Trenton Merricks pithily
summarizes them as follows:

Perhaps there is some fourth thing, some fundamental aspect of God, that
explains or accounts for their unity? But (i) this is plausibly incompatible
with DDS (since this thing would be some positive ontological item within but
distinct from God himself), and (ii) this reduces to the answer in the
previous paragraph, since there’s the further question of what explains the
unity or connectedness or compresence of {Father, Son, Holy Spirit, this
fourth fundamental aspect of God}. And any explanation in terms of the final
element in the set is just to cite _one of the very x’s_ among x1, x2, … xn to
account for their unity.

This new version [of pluralism] implies that all entities—properties, numbers,
mountains, God, creatures, everything—generically exist. This implication is
clearly in tension with the sorts of views that virtually all pluralists have
tried to articulate and defend. This tension is illustrated by the fact that…
historically influential motivations for pluralism are inconsistent with the
claim that all entities generically exist. And this tension is not surprising.
That is, it is not surprising that pluralism about being is in tension with
the idea that there is a single way of being that everything enjoys. (2019,
pp. 603-604)

For instance, there is the whole-to-part grounding that we covered earlier.
Another seemingly legitimate candidate explanation for the unity of an
object’s parts is that it is _metaphysically necessary_ that they be so
combined. If we take the ultimate reality (be it the neo-classical God or some
ground layer of physical reality) to be a necessary being, the unity of its
parts could easily be explained in terms of the metaphysical necessity of said
unity. Now, we’re not claiming that metaphysical necessity categorically
precludes any further explanation. Rather, we’re simply noting that
metaphysical necessity may plausibly _itself_ constitute a kind of explanation
for something’s obtaining. Even if the reader disagrees with this, the point
is that nothing in Feser’s Neo-Platonic proof gives those who _accept_ (or are
even _neutral_ on) the explanatory legitimacy (in principle) of metaphysical
necessity any reason to abandon their position.[17]

19\. If act-potency pluralists do not accept generic existence, then they
cannot—by their own lights—state that everything is thus and so.

“Overall, then, I do not think that EIT is theoretically any more virtuous
than CTST.”

With an **eternalist** hat on, I say that (i) there certainly is change, but
(ii) change is simply variance in the properties of four-dimensional objects
along their temporal dimension. This doesn’t involve or entail being arising
from non-being. It simply involves variance in actual features. In that case,
premise (1) is false, since whether or not there is a distinction between act
and potency, there is no instance of being arising from non-being.

Furthermore, a key determinant of prior or intrinsic probability is
simplicity. And, indeed, EIT enjoys both quantitative and qualitative
simplicity (and enjoys them far better than CTST). For one thing, CTST
requires a categorically different kind of causation in our ontology (namely,
sustaining causation). EIT does not require this. For another thing, CTST
requires a categorically different kind of being in our ontology. In
particular, CTST requires at least one timeless being that sustains temporal
things in existence. It is thus committed not only to all the temporal
entities EIT is committed to, but it also includes more entities (a timeless
entity), more kinds of causation (sustenance or conservation from without, as
well as timeless-to-temporal causation), and more fundamental (i.e.,
irreducible) kinds of entities—reality is fundamentally divided at least into
timeless/immutable concrete things and temporal/immutable concrete things.
This makes CTST much more complex than EIT and hence much less intrinsically
probable.[3]

So much for taxonomic questions concerning scope. We turn now to another
series of taxonomic questions pertaining to the nature of persistence. In
particular, we will ask: what does persistence amount to? Will the existential
inertia thesis understand it in endurantist terms, perdurantist terms, or
something else altogether? How does persistence (and, thus, existential
inertia) relate to the findings of contemporary physics?

First, act-potency pluralism is motivated, at least in part, by the conviction
(or insight, or intuition) that _potential_ things and _actual_ things don’t
exist in the same way. On this point, for instance, Feser writes: “For if
potentiality and actuality had being or reality in _exactly the same_ sense,
then what could that mean if not that potentiality is really a kind of
actuality or that actuality is really a kind of potentiality?” (2017, p. 182).
This question seems to voice the conviction that there is not a way of being
that potency and act alike enjoy. But this conviction, of course, contradicts
the thesis that act and potency alike generically exist. Those who share the
conviction should therefore reject generic existence. “But”, writes Merricks
concerning abstract/concrete ways of being (which applies equally to
actual/potential ways of being), “this conviction is the best motivation for
pluralism. So this new version of pluralism [i.e., one that embraces generic
existence] contradicts the best motivation for pluralism” (2019, p. 602). This
is the first reason why act-potency pluralists should not accept generic
existence.

**Second** , as a tip for navigating this post, use your computer’s command F
function and search for the relevant section(s) of interest from the above
outline.

[8] By ‘feature’, I don’t mean to commit to the view that an inertial tendency
is some kind of positive ontological item existing in or exemplified by the
object in question. By ‘manifest a further feature’, then, we just mean
‘behave in a way that neither of its parts on their own behave’.

One might think that Schmid’s account presupposes that for each time there is
an immediately temporally prior time. But if time is continuous as opposed to
discrete (such that for any two distinct times, there is a time between them),
then it is simply false that there exists an immediately temporally prior
time. By way of response, note first that even if Schmid’s account works only
under discrete time, it would still be significant if there were a workable
metaphysical account of existential inertia assuming discrete time.[9] Second,
according to Schmid, the account is not (after all) essentially tied to
discrete time. If time is continuous, we can let the temporal state
immediately prior to _t_ be some suitably small (perhaps infinitesimally
small) non-zero interval of time with _t_ as its later-than bound.

[16] Schmid describes his account, for instance, as one according to which EIT
is “a primitive necessity” (2021, p. 210). The account is thus clearly a
_propositional_ necessity account.

First, some definitions. To _positively destroy_ O at time t is to actively
bring about O’s cessation at t, such that O endures through [t*, t) but not
[t*, t], where t* < t. _Ontological dependence_ is a hierarchical or
concurrent dependence of a less fundamental object on the existence or
activity of another, more fundamental object. (Examples include sustaining or
conserving efficient causation, grounding, and functional realization.)

Edward Feser provides a wide variety of arguments and considerations in favor
of his Aristotelian proof’s causal principle (CP). According to CP (captured
in premise (4)), no potential can be actualized unless something already
actual causally actualizes it. Suppose CP is true, and suppose object O exists
at time t. Now, for O to go out of existence at some arbitrary t’ (such that
t’ > t) is for a change to occur—it is for O’s potential to cease to exist to
become actual. But since a potential can only become actual if something
already actual causally actualizes it, it follows that O could only go out of
existence at t’ if something already actual causally actualizes this. So, if
nothing already actual casually actualizes O’s going out of existence at t’, O
will not go out of existence at t’.

There is much to say in response. First, the argument as Nemes articulates it
requires whole swathes of highly contentious metaphysical commitments the
existential inertialist need not accept. The argument, for instance, requires
a constituent ontology on which features of a thing _compose_ it (and, in
particular, on which the metaphysical principle of _esse_ (existence) is a
_constituent part_ of the substance). It also requires (i) realism about
essences, (ii) realism about _esse_ or existence, and (iii) a view of
existence as a first-order property had primarily by substances (rather than
(say) a second-order property (i.e., a property of properties) or not a
property at all). But the inertialist isn’t (and needn’t be) beholden to these
metaphysical commitments.

[17] Here’s a way to appreciate why some philosophers think necessity can
explain. Suppose the law of non-contradiction is true. Why? What explains
that? Perhaps the explanation is that reality is consistent. But why is
reality consistent? One of the only plausible answers that comes to mind is
that ‘it just _must_ be that way!’. By my lights, playing the ‘why?’ game—that
is, repeatedly asking why in a chain of explanations—will ultimately bottom
out in ‘well, things just _have_ to be that way—end of story.’ It should be
noted, though, that my rejoinder to the Neo-Platonic proof does not rely on
_showing_ or _justifying_ why necessity can explain. That would be a
_rebutting_ defeater. But I am offering an _undercutting_ defeater. In other
words, I am arguing that (i) nothing in Feser’s Neo-Platonic proof _rules out_
the legitimacy of this kind of explanation (in principle), and that (ii)
ruling it out is _required_ in order for the Neo-Platonic proof to succeed.

First, it presupposes a controversial metaphysical account of the nature of
(material) substances. Indeed, the argument— _if_ successful (something we
wouldn’t grant)—establishes merely that “whether [hylemorphism] is correct
depends in part on whether things have existential inertia in the first
place,” for if they have existential inertia, then (per Feser’s argument)
hylemorphism is false (Audi 2019, p. 7). And note that in this dialectical
context, the onus is not on _me_ to provide _positive reasons_ to think that
hylemorphism is false. Rather, the present dialectical context is one wherein
_Feser_ is attempting to provide positive reason to think that EIT is false.
Thus, I need only provide _undercutting_ defeaters of the argument. And thus
it is a perfectly acceptable dialectical move to pinpoint an assumption of the
argument that is left unjustified in the dialectical context at hand. (If
Feser wants to provide the inertialist with some reason to change their mind,
then it’s no use presenting them arguments with premises that they simply
reject or find unmotivated.)

Consider, for instance, the God of neo-classical theism. According to the
classical theistic understanding of parts, this neo-classical God is a
composite object. But it is extremely unclear why there must be a sustaining
efficient cause of his existence (or even how there _could_ be). He is not
situated within a physical context; he does not require a host of conditions
to be in place in order to exist (like temperature, pressure, etc.); he is a
necessary being; and he causes the existence of every concrete object apart
from himself. Under such an understanding, it is simply _metaphysically
impossible_ for there to be a pre-existing context of concrete objects that
causally sustain the neo-classical God’s existence, since there being such a
context _already presupposes_ the neo-classical God’s creative activity.
Nothing Feser says in any of the steps justifies a demand for a sustaining
cause of the neo-classical God’s existence.

23\. If act-potency pluralists should not accept generic existence, and if
their not accepting generic existence implies that they should not accept act-
potency pluralism, then act-potency pluralists should not accept act-potency
pluralism.

Once again, thanks to DJ Linford for co-authoring this section. I will use
‘we’ and ‘our’ in this section to reflect this.

_Existential Inertia Thesis (EIT)_ : Necessarily, concrete objects (i) persist
in existence (once in existence) without requiring a continuously concurrent
sustaining cause of their existence and (ii) cease to exist only if caused to
do so. (Schmid 2021, p. 203)

In Newtonian and Galilean space-time, relations of objective simultaneity
allow one to define absolute time. That is, two objects that are objectively
simultaneous are said to be at the same time. But without objective
simultaneity, no two numerically distinct objects can be objectively said to
occupy the same time. Leaving aside the possibility of extended simples, any
non-point-like material object O has some spatiotemporal extension and so has
some collection of numerically distinct proper parts. If no two numerically
distinct objects can objectively be said to occupy the same time, no two
numerically distinct proper parts of O can objectively be said to occupy the
same time.

[8] Note that this is a stipulative definition of ‘destruction’. We recognize
that it may sound odd to call it ‘destruction’. (Then again, lots of our
ordinary concepts sound odd when adapted or applied to perdurantism.) What
matters for present purposes is that we have a clear and precise definition of
the relevant concept. If the reader still demurs at our usage, simply replace
the word with another, more fitting one.

If God goes from knowing them to not knowing them, then there is succession in
God’s life [and, moreover, God has potential that becomes actual—viz.
potential to acquire knowledge]

_Step three_ of Feser’s case for NPCP is that it’s clear that there are
extrinsic causal factors that sustain composite objects in existence:

For act-potency pluralists think that everything either a-exists or p-exists.
Thus, by the pluralist’s lights, making a claim about all the entities in the
domains of each of ∀a and ∀p leaves nothing out.

[14] The argument that the foot is the eternal cause of the impression is
worse off when we consider, e.g., counterfactual accounts of causation. At the
possible worlds closest to the world containing the co-eternal feet and
impression where the foot is absent, the impression remains. And so, on the
counterfactual analysis of causation, the foot is not the cause of the
impression.

[29] Schmid echoes these commitments in his [or, rather, my…] account of one
necessary condition for the need for a sustaining cause: A “sustaining cause C
is required for substance S’s being in condition or outcome O only if (i)
there is some causal or explanatory factor or force F—intrinsic or extrinsic
to S—acting on S to bring S toward some condition or outcome ~O; (ii) F is a
net factor or force in the absence of C’s causal operation; and (iii) S (or
some state of affairs involving S) is in condition or outcome O distinct from
~O” (Forthcoming). According to Schmid, an “intrinsic causal factor or force
would be something like a natural tendency, inclination, or disposition
inherent to a thing”, whereas “an extrinsic one would be something like the
effect of gravity, friction, and so on” (Forthcoming). And by ‘net force’,
Schmid means “a causal factor or group of causal factors whose overall causal
contribution is like a vector quantity insofar as it contributes toward a
definite end state or outcome and is not counterbalanced by some other (group
of) causal factor(s)” (Forthcoming).

Transtemporal explanatory relations (e.g., causal relations) obtaining among
the successive phases of objects’ lives or among their temporal parts (à la
transtemporal accounts);

But perhaps Oderberg can avoid this circularity, too. For Oderberg can grant
that _at time t_ , O’s tendency to persist cannot explain O’s existence _at
time t_ , precisely because the former presupposes the latter. But that is
_not the proposal_. The proposal for explaining O’s existence at some non-
first time _t_ at which O exists is, rather, something like: (i) O existed at
some time _t*_ _earlier_ than _t_ ; (ii) O possessed, at _t*_ , the tendency
to persist in existence unless subjected to sufficiently destructive factors;
(iii) O has this tendency in virtue of the _kind_ of thing O is (i.e., in
virtue of O’s nature); and (iv) O was not subjected to sufficiently
destructive factors between _t*_ and _t_. The explanans here is _neither_
explained by _nor_ presupposes the prior obtaining of the explanandum (O’s
existence at _t_ ). Circularity, then, seems to be avoided after all.[5]

This, then, is the essence of Benocci’s strategy. It seems to represent a
_prima facie_ defensible, coherent, and ontologically lightweight metaphysical
account of EIT.

This response is confused. And yet it is precisely the response Feser has
given to my charge of question-begging. It is irrelevant whether the
**_proponent_** of the argument has independent reasons for accepting one of
the premises. What matters, instead, is whether the argument—its premise(s)
and that which is said on their behalf—gives those who **_don’t already accept
it_** sufficient reason to **_abandon_** their position. The job of the
_detractor_ of the argument is **_not_** to give some argument _against_ the
premise, i.e., some argument positively justifying its denial. Just as the
onus is not on the atheist to give some positive argument against theism in
the above dialectical context, the onus is not on me to give some positive
argument against hylemorphism in the context of Feser’s PPC-based argument.
Thus, Feser’s response to the charge of question-begging fails.

Feser’s second criticism of EIT is form-matter interdependence. “For since in
purely material substances matter depends on form and form depends on matter,”
writes Feser, “we would have a vicious explanatory circle unless there was
something outside the form/matter composite which accounts for its existence”
(Feser, 2011, pp. 247-248). What to make of this argument?

What matters for present purposes, though, is that nothing in Feser’s Neo-
Platonic proof—and, moreover, nothing Feser says on behalf of its
premises—gives any reason for thinking that such views of divine aseity fail.

_Thomistic Proof Causal Principle (TPCP)_ : Since its essence and existence
remain really distinct at every moment at which it exists, including here and
now, its existence must be imparted to it by some cause distinct from it at
every moment at which it exists, including here and now.

[6] Alternatively, if one wants to say—at least with respect to the
Transtemporal Explanans—that the explanans is intrinsic to S _in the sense
that_ the ‘principal explanatory mechanism’—transtemporal causation relating
the successive phases of S’s life—is entirely contained within S’s life,
that’s fine. Then premise (7) (“there are no other internal principles from
which such a substance might derive such a tendency”) would be false, since
there **_is_** something else intrinsic to S’s life that accounts for S’s
inertial persistence—to wit, transtemporal causal relations among the
successive phases or states of S’s life.

Kerr then considers and criticizes three different metaphysical accounts of
inertial persistence. The first account is, broadly speaking, a transtemporal
account: “a thing’s past existence influences its future so that as long as a
thing exists in the past and nothing prevents it from reaching its future, a
thing will continue to exist absent competing causal factors” (Kerr
Forthcoming). In response to this account, Kerr writes:

Fourth, there’s the question of N’s intrinsic nature or character: what might
N be? I wish to remain neutral on this. Perhaps it’s a collection of
fundamental particles, or mereological simples, or physical simples, or
superstrings.[23] Or perhaps it’s some foundational quantum field, or the
universal wave function, or some neutral monist substance, or the priority
monist universe. Or perhaps it’s the panentheist or neo-classical theist
temporal God.[24] Options abound for the inertialist.

Here’s the first modal question: is the inertial thesis _necessarily_ true if
true at all? Explicit inclusion of the necessity operator is only found in
Schmid’s EIT. And while I agree with Schmid (myself, lol) that “because
existential inertia and existential expiration are (or would be) such broad,
foundational metaphysical features of reality, it seems that they would
_necessarily_ obtain if they obtain at all” (2021, p. 202), I will here leave
open the modal register of our thesis.

I have two responses. First, Kerr simply _asserts_ but _does not justify_ that
no essence-existence composite need ever exist. Neo-classical theists,
panentheists, and non-theists who accept a necessarily existent foundation of
reality will all simply reject that no essence-existence composite need ever
exist. More generally, Kerr’s claim is flatly rejected by those who accept
(e.g.) the objectual necessity account of EIT. Nothing Kerr says here gives
any reason to rule out such views.[7] Second, even if a given essence-
existence composite need not exist (or need not exist at non-first moments of
its life), all that follows from this (by my lights) is that there needs to be
an _explanation_ of its existence (or existence at non-first moments of its
life). (At the _very_ least, Kerr has failed to justify why a _cause_ is
needed rather than a mere _explanation_.) But as we’ve seen, there are lots of
explanations that make no reference to (sustaining) causes.

If you want to explore a small sub-set of the abovementioned reasons, you can
see, _inter alia_ :

Some might worry that (causal) transtemporal accounts violate the simultaneity
of causation. Causes do not temporally precede but are _simultaneous_ with
their effects, or so the worry goes.[13] Imagine, for instance, that a foot
has (from eternity past) been impressing upon some sand. We are supposed to
have the intuition that the imprint in the sand is caused by the foot’s
pushing down on the sand. But the latter does not temporally precede the
former. There is simply a relation of concurrent dependence. The reader should
note that the objection from the simultaneity of causation only works if
causes _must_ be simultaneous (or concurrent) with their effects; otherwise,
if causes can temporally precede their effects, then defenders of
transtemporal accounts can say that temporal objects are the transtemporal
cause of their own persistence.

If my above responses work—and if the metaphysical accounts of EIT from
Section 5 are defensible—then the _De Ente_ objection to EIT is undermined. In
fact, as should be clear by now, I actually don’t need—in the present
dialectical context—to _positively show_ that the metaphysical accounts of EIT
are defensible. I only need the weaker claim that neither the _De Ente_
argument nor what its proponents (e.g., Nemes, Kerr) say on its behalf gives
those who _accept_ (or are neutral on) one or more of the metaphysical
accounts of EIT sufficient reason to _abandon_ their position and instead
affirm that all such accounts fail. And this weaker claim is, I think, clearly
true. Thus, the _De Ente_ objection to EIT is undermined.

First, ONA leaves open the explanatory relation that obtains between N and
non-N objects. It allows the relation to be one of efficient causal
sustenance, or of grounding, or of constitution, or of realization.

But merely from the fact that something does not exist in virtue of itself
(i.e., in virtue of what it is), it doesn’t follow that it thereby exists in
virtue of a concurrent, sustaining cause. It may have no explanation for its
existence (e.g., the neo-classical theistic God’s existence, or some
foundational necessarily existent non-theistic reality), or it may have an
explanation for its existence (and continuance therein) that makes no
reference to concurrent, sustaining causation. Many of the other replies
developed above apply here as well ( _mutatis mutandis_ ).

The first problem with the response is that the chemical microstructure of the
chair is a _material cause_ of the chair, _not_ an efficient cause that brings
the chair into and efficiently sustains it in being. Hence, the example
doesn’t constitute a counterexample to Oppy’s claim, since Oppy is
fundamentally and ultimately concerned with existential inertia, i.e., things’
continuing in existence _not_ without a material cause but instead _without a
continuously sustaining efficient cause (or ground, etc.)_.

This response, though, doesn’t work. First, from the fact that it is not
natural for x to exist—i.e., it is not of x’s very nature to exist—it doesn’t
follow that it is not natural for x to _persist once in existence_. Even
granting Kerr’s other points, all he has shown is that an essence-existence
composite does not _exist by default_. But it’s an entirely separate question
whether, _once in existence_ , it _persists_ by default. And, indeed, this is
precisely what at least some tendency-disposition accounts affirm: even though
there may be nothing about x itself that demands that x _exists_ , there _is_
something about x that demands that— _once it exists_ —it persists absent
destruction. One might retort that x’s existence is _continuously_ distinct
from x’s essence, in which case x is _continuously_ non-existent by default.
But the inertialist attracted to the tendency-disposition account in question
can make two replies. First, the inertialist can reject that continuous-non-
existence-by-default follows from continuous-distinction-between-essence-and-
existence, _precisely because_ things enjoy a natural tendency to persist. For
if things enjoy such a tendency, then while they may be non-existent by
default, they will _persist_ by default even if their essence and existence
are continuously distinct.[6] Second, _even if_ continuously-non-existent-by-
default followed from continuous-distinction-between-essence-and-existence,
the inertialist can say that that this only implies that if x is to
continually _exist_ , there needs to be some _explanation_ for such
continuance. But, of course, not all explanations of continuance must adduce
concurrent sustaining causes, as illustrated by the various metaphysical
accounts of EIT.

[20] One might say that the timeless sustainer is _necessitated_ to engage in
such sustaining activity. But why would that be? Is this just a brute or
primitive necessity? Going this route will similarly multiply mysteries, it
seems. (Detractors of EIT of a _theist_ stripe will likely resist this
response, too, as it seems to remove the timeless God’s _freedom_.)

We make two points in response. First, it seems that the inference to
existence’s being an activity is a non-sequitur. Merely from the fact that
existence is neither an essential nor non-essential feature of S, it doesn’t
follow that existence is an _activity_ of S. (For instance: perhaps there is
simply _no such thing as_ _existence_ —perhaps, in other words, there is no
positive ontological item that is _existence_.) Second, the exact same
reasoning Hsiao and Sanders employ against existence’s being a property or a
non-essential feature of S equally applies to their claim that existence is an
activity of S. For in order for S to _act_ in a given way—to perform some
activity like walking, say—S must _already_ exist. Something must first
_exist_ in order to engage in various activities (i.e., in order to act, in
order to have activity). Non-existent things, after all, surely don’t act or
engage in activities. Thus, existence cannot be an activity of S. This
reasoning, by our lights, is exactly parallel to the reasoning Hsiao and
Sanders use to dismiss existence’s being a property and a non-essential
feature (respectively).

Much more can be said in reply to the argument, but that suffices for present
purposes. Let’s now consider another element of Kerr’s criticism:

Consider one of Mumford and Anjum’s stock examples of causation. Sugar, water,
and stirring are jointly sufficient for producing a sugar water solution.
Therefore, according to Mumford and Anjum, sugar, water, and stirring are the
joint cause of the sugar water solution. According to Mumford and Anjum, the
sugar is stirred into the water over a period of time, say, from _t 1_ to _t
2_. They argue that the simultaneity of the effect and cause consists in the
concurrence of all three components throughout the process from _t 1_ to _t 2.
_However, according to relativistic orthodoxy, there is no such process. Each
of the microphysical constituents comprising the sugar and water carries its
own clock and, in general, no clock can be constructed that objectively
synthesizes all of those microphysical clocks. And since no clock can be
constructed that synthesizes all of the microphysical clocks, there is no time
at which the sugar objectively begins to be stirred into the water and no time
at which the sugar objectively finishes being stirred into the water. There is
no objective fact about _when_ the process starts or about _when_ the process
ends. Moreover, since each of the microphysical constituents carries its own
clock, and no sugar molecule is ever co-located with a water molecule, we have
a difficult time understanding how the water molecules could be said to
objectively concur with the sugar molecules.

**_Transtemporal Explanans_** : (i) There is an absence of sufficiently
causally destructive factors operative on S from m-1 to m (where m-1 is the
moment immediately prior to m), and (ii) the state and/or existence of
temporal concrete objects (or, at least, those within EIT’s quantificational
domain) at a given moment at which they exist causally produces their
existence at the next moment provided that no sufficiently causally
_destructive_ factors are operative.[5]

Now, one might worry that the above transtemporal account does not explain
persistence _simpliciter_ but instead only explains O’s existence at _t_ or on
a specific Cauchy surface. This worry, however, is misguided. An explanation
of O’s persistence _simpliciter_ arises with the conjunction of all the
applications of the explanatory schema outlined in Schmid’s account to every
non-first time or every non-first Cauchy surface at which O exists.

Thus, not only does Feser’s argument from change for the act-potency analysis
fail to justify ruling out my view (which it would need to do in order to
succeed, since my view is one on which premise (1) is false), but Feser’s own
analysis is committed to the very thing that is allegedly problematic about my
analysis.

Here’s a possible objection: just as the the classical theist objects to the
Neo-Humean that the Humean mosaic is brute and so cannot deliver on an
explanation of a hierarchical series, why wouldn’t the classical theist say
that Maudlin’s primitive laws are yet another collection of brute facts that
cannot deliver on an explanation of hierarchical series?

My purpose in this section is to uncover a series of questions to clarify and
taxonomize inertial theses. While I’ll take sides on some of these questions,
my main focus is the taxonomic questions _themselves_ , since the taxonomic
questions serve to bring clarity and precision to the existential inertia
debate. The taxonomic questions also lay the foundation for our
characterization of existential inertia in Section 4.

From these principles, we have a recipe—so Benocci argues—for an account of
existential inertia. For according to the Complementary Principle, any object
with a disposition to destruct in (and only in) circumstances C likewise has a
disposition to remain in existence in (and only in) non-C circumstances. And
it is this disposition of an object to remain in existence that, according to
Benocci, is “aptly called the existential inertia of that object” (2018, p.
62). All that’s left to add is that the relevant circumstances of kind C are
those in which the object is subject to sufficiently destructive or
annihilating factors. Benocci concludes:

What kinds of ontological items inertially persist? Audi’s inertial thesis, as
we’ve seen, is completely unrestricted in scope: _whatever_ exists is poised
to continue to exist if undisturbed and inactive. This seems implausible,
however. Suppose abstracta (non-spatiotemporal, acausal entities like
universals, propositions, mathematical objects, etc.) exist. Because abstracta
don’t enter into causal relations, they are undisturbed and inactive. Audi’s
unrestricted thesis therefore entails that such abstract objects are poised to
continue or persist in existence. But surely this is a category error—abstract
objects, _qua_ non-temporal, cannot ‘persist’ or ‘continue’ in existence.
Persistence is similarly a category error if applied to non-temporal concreta
(if they exist).

I think it would be more accurate, however, to say that such objects simply
_have no default state_. And as I’ve explained in my [Sophia
paper](https://philpapers.org/rec/SCHSOO-8) and [my response to
Feser](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/07/04/feser-on-schmid-on-
the-aristotelian-proof/), this fact can plausibly _motivate_ inertial
persistence: just as a cup does not occupy location L by default, it doesn’t
follow that the cup needs some concurrent causal ‘keeper’ of the cup to
maintain it in location L. (Indeed, we have good reason to think this is
false—compare the astronauts on the ISS.) Indeed, the cup has _no default
location whatsoever_ —neither L nor non-L. But what this means is that,
plausibly, _once_ the cup is placed in a given location, then—provided that
there are no ‘net causal factors’ operative—the cup will simply _retain_ its
state of being in L. And this without needing something to ‘hold’ or ‘keep’ it
there. The first metaphysical argument, then, doesn’t count against EIT.

I think EIT—or, more accurately, various metaphysical accounts of EIT—enjoys a
number of theoretical virtues (at least in relation to CTST). Before
considering the first virtue of EIT, however, let’s consider the following
question: why does anything exist at all? Why isn’t reality just blank? Here
is a simple answer: something exists rather than nothing because it is
_metaphysically necessary_ that something exists. This answer nicely explains
why there is something rather than nothing: it is simply metaphysically
impossible for there to be nothing.

This follows from the _factivity of knowledge_. Knowledge is factive—in other
words, one can only know that p is true if p is, in fact, true. It cannot be
the case that one knows p but p is false. E.g., It’s true that 1+1 is 2, and
so it makes no sense to say that I _know_ 1+1 _isn’t_ 2.

I have four replies. First, adopting this view seems to do significant damage
to Persistence Arguments for classical theism. For this view grants the
central contention of (some versions of) tendency-disposition accounts of
EIT—namely, that things by nature tend to persist. If we grant this central
contention, then—plausibly—we have a readily available inertialist-friendly
explanation of persistence. Why posit anything else to explain persistence if
we already have—as this objection seems to grant—a workable tendency-
disposition account? The objection, then, seems to undermine Persistence
Arguments for classical theism.[Fn]

I thank DJ Linford for writing this section. It is not 100% complete — it is
still under construction. But once it is complete, this blog post will be
updated.

I have several replies. First, as we’ve seen, the inertialist need not accept
the metaphysics underlying the argument. Setting that aside, though, let’s
consider each premise in turn. One difficulty that arises with premises (1)
and (2) is that prior to _anything’s_ existing, it is nothing. For if x were
something _prior_ to its existence, then its existence would be prior to its
existence, which is absurd. There is thus nothing special about essence-
existence composites here—even prior to the existence of something in which
essence and existence are identical, it is nothing. In that case, though,
premise (2) would lead to conclusion that _nothing_ exists in virtue of what
it is. For if (as premise (2) says) not existing in virtue of what x is
_follows upon_ the fact that prior to x’s existence, x is nothing, then—since
the latter is true of _everything_ —it follows that _nothing_ exists in virtue
of what it is. But this, of course, is incompatible with the very _De Ente_
argument Kerr is proffering, since such an argument concludes that there is
something that _does_ exist in virtue of what it is and which imparts
existence to everything else that _doesn’t_ exist in virtue of what it is.

[2] Most neo-classical theists would reject the underlying metaphysics that
leads to this, of course. But recall that we’re setting that rejection aside
for present purposes. (Cf. my first reply to Kerr’s (Forthcoming) criticism.)

Rundle (2004, pp. 88-92) holds that persistence is not itself a change and
concludes, on that basis, that no continuously operative sustaining cause is
needed to explain it. Thus, Rundle writes: “When, we may ask, is a sustaining
cause needed? Most obviously, when there is a disintegrating factor to be
countered or inhibited, as when a structure will collapse unless it is
supported. However, if there is no such threat there is no such need” ( _ibid_
, p. 88). He continues:

If there is change, then some things go from being true to being false (or
vice versa).

Feser continues with his objection: “The point for the moment is this. If
nothing about the essence or nature of a thing entails that it _exists at all_
in the first place, then it is hard to see how anything about its essence or
nature could entail that will _persist in existence_ once it does exist”
(2021). But—by way of response—nothing in the exchange above assumes that it
was something about the essence or nature of the contingent thing that
explains why the object persists. Totally separate explanatory facts were
cited. And so Feser’s point doesn’t support the denial of EIT.

This whole existential inertia thesis is self refuting if One now phrases the
initial argument in modal terms. Because Duns Scotus Argued against It
already. In Plantingan/Kripkean Modal Terms. Its Duns scotus Argument For the
Univocity of being!!!!!!!!U can’t argue against classical theism by using a
classical theist’s arguments amongst one another while staying a naturalistIT
is impossible in any possible world for the statement peter van Inwagen exists
to be true For then it would Follow The Statement Peter Van Inwagen exists is
true(In the Kripkean Sense) The statement Peter Van Inwagen Exist. would be
true in all Possible worlds IS then Statement Peter Van Inwagen exists Then
ITSELF NOT A NECESSARY EXISTENT. Because Logically IT WOULD FOLLOW THAT THAT
some aspect of Reality would be indeed Then Meteorologically Speaking a Self
Existent. simple.plantingan/kripke’s Modal Logic is just a rephrasing of duns
scotus’ logic, Its Duns Scotus’s argument against Being analogical, As a
Scotist who is a classical theist, I scream this anytime I read anything about
existential inetia. It seems people think Logic was invented Yesterday. Its
Duns Scotus’ ArgumentBut Being itself cannot itself be a being because then
Ontology and mereology get confused.

But why might someone accept transtemporal accounts? We’ve already canvassed
some reasons (e.g., plausibly, appealing to past things to explain present
things is often both legitimate and indispensable). Schmid offers (what can
naturally be interpreted as) an argument from diachronic identity. In
particular, Schmid is concerned with “adequately accounting for the
distinction between instantaneous replacement and genuine persistence” (2021,
p. 215). Schmid argues that transtemporal causal relations plausibly provide
necessary conditions for adequately distinguishing “between a successive
series of numerically distinct but qualitatively similar simulacra (on the one
hand) and genuine persistence (on the other)” ( _ibid_ ). According to Schmid,
relevant causal continuity among the stages of an object’s life—where “the
later existence of the object at least partly causally or explanatorily
depends on the earlier state(s) and existence of the object”—is a necessary
condition and partial ground of diachronic identity ( _ibid_ ). And if we
already have such transtemporal relations in our ontology, why posit anything
further to account for persistence? “Shave it off”, sayeth Ockham’s Razor and
the existential inertialist.

Why? Well, just think about it. If there is change—e.g., water’s going from a
liquid state to a solid state—then <that the water is liquid> goes from being
true to being false. And <that the water is solid> goes from being false to
being true.

Or consider a naturalistic view according to which there exist ultimate,
fundamental constituents of physical reality (whether they be particles (like
quarks), one or more foundational physical fields, or what have you). No
reason is given as to why _these_ composite objects are likewise situated
within a physical context wherein a host of external sustaining causes have to
operate in harmony in order for such objects to exist. It’s not at all clear
why or how temperature, pressure, and the other factors cited are even
relevant to the ground layer of physical reality. After all, such a ground
layer is precisely that which ultimately accounts for how such physical
contexts could even arise in the first place—and so it would be absurd for
there to be a more fundamental, pre-existent physical context that sustains
_them_ in being.

But perhaps someone will object that Schmid’s propositional necessity account
stops the explanatory buck too early. For there are _further explanations
available_ —ones that are viable and illuminating. All else being equal, if we
have a viable, readily-available, illuminating explanation for _x_ , then we
shouldn’t adopt a view on which _x_ is simply brute. We should, instead,
explain things as far as we can. Schmid’s propositional necessity account
violates this. It explains persistence ultimately by appeal to brute
metaphysical necessity. But there is a viable, readily-available, illuminating
explanation of persistence in terms of the sustaining activity of something
timeless. Like Schmid’s account, this explanation will eventually bottom out
in some primitive metaphysical necessity; but _unlike_ Schmid’s account, it
doesn’t fall afoul of stopping the explanatory buck too early. What to make of
this objection?

To be sure, there might be the further question of why some of those
explanatory facts _themselves_ obtain. For instance, there might be the
question as to why reality is so constituted that the successive stages in an
object’s life are related by causal relations.[11] But this is a _separate
question_ from why O exists at t. And, plausibly, it won’t be all that
difficult to provide plausible stories for the former question. (Indeed, it’s
not clear why explaining it would be any more difficult than explaining why
reality is so constituted so as to have any causal relations at all (ever), or
to have causal relations other than those relating the successive stages of an
object’s life, or what have you.) Finally, to quote Beaudoin, “it is not a
condition on legitimate explanation that a deeper explanation for every
statement in the explanans always be ready to hand, or even that it exist at
all” (2007, p. 89).

Overall, EIT explains and unifies a whole host of disparate phenomena: (i) why
objects persist instead of being annihilated at seemingly chaotic points, (ii)
why objects cease to exist only when causally destroyed, (iii) the dearth of
observational evidence of sustaining causes, and (iv) the legitimacy of
ordinary and scientific explanation. It also enjoys both quantitative and
qualitative simplicity. This leads me to conclude that EIT is superior to CTST
both on account of explanatory breadth and depth as well as simplicity.

Now, one might object that the proponent of CTST—following Oderberg—can adopt
a view on which temporal objects have a natural tendency to persist, which is
nevertheless ultimately dependent upon God. On this view, the objection
continues, the Bayesian argument fails. For while God could in principle
annihilate any given temporal object at any given time, that would count as a
miracle (i.e., a suspension of the natural order)—which, by definition, is
improbable. Hence, like n-EIT, it would be far more likely for us to observe
things persisting in existence in the absence of destruction.

[7] Also of note is Oderberg’s (2014, pp. 351-353) defense of the tendency to
persist in light of an objection from radioactive decay. Schmid (2021, p. 204)
likewise addresses this objection. I’ll address it in Section 7 of this post.

The simplest relativistic space-time is Minkowski space-time, that is, a
relativistic space-time without gravitational effects. Like Galilean space-
time, the points of Minkowski space-time are not typically thought to persist
because relativity does not allow for absolute rest. However, in contrast to
either Newtonian or Galilean space-times, the standard conception of Minkowski
space-time holds that there are no objective simultaneity relations between
any two numerically distinct space-time points. And since there are no
objective simultaneity relations between any two numerically distinct space-
time points, we should not think of Minkowski space-time as being objectively
divisible into three-dimensional spaces located at successive times.

As Beaudoin characterizes existential inertia, “[a]n object enjoying
existential inertia will continue to exist, without being sustained in
existence by any external agent, until something else comes along and destroys
it” (2007, p. 86). Along similar lines, Adler views the thesis as affirming
that “[c]ontingent individuals continue in existence, once given existence,
until counteracting causes intervene to deprive them of their existence”
(1980, p. 125). Feser follows suit: “the world of contingent things, once it
exists, will tend to continue in existence on its own at least until something
positively acts to destroy it” (2011, p. 239).

Indeed, things get even more interesting when we do a Bayesian comparison
between CTST and the necessary truth of EIT (hereafter, n-EIT) when it comes
to explaining the contrastive fact above. Let that fact be F. Now, recall F:
temporal objects, once in existence, uniformly and reliably persist absent
sufficiently destructive causal factors as opposed to being annihilated at
other points in their lives without being subject to causal destruction. For
under the n-EIT, the probability of F is 1. In other words, P(F|n-EIT) = 1.
But the probability of F is significantly less than 1 under CTTS. In other
words, P(F|CTST) << 1\. And hence F strongly confirms n-EIT vis-à-vis CTST.

I have two responses. First, even if the alternative account adducing timeless
sustenance has an explanatory advantage over Schmid’s propositional necessity
account, the latter is far more _parsimonious_ than the former in terms of
both quantitative simplicity (the number of entities postulated) and
qualitative simplicity (the number of irreducible _kinds_ of entities
postulated). For the former posits not only more _entities_ (namely, timeless
concreta in addition to temporal concreta, as well as relations obtaining
between the two) but also more _kinds_ of entities (namely, the new category
of _timeless concreta_ ). Thus, even _granting_ an explanatory advantage to
the timeless sustenance view, it’s not at all clear that it is superior to
Schmid’s account _all things considered_.

If existence becomes an essential feature of x, then it is impossible for x to
go out of existence.

Feser also charges that EIT is viciously circular. Applying his objection to
an example of a contingent substance (viz. water), he writes:

Fido’s existence is distinct from Fido’s essence, does not follow from Fido’s
essence, and cannot be imparted by Fido to his essence. All of these things
are true not only before Fido exists and at the time he is conceived, but also
after he comes into being, and indeed at every moment he is alive. Fido’s
existence _here and now_ is distinct from his essence and does not follow from
his essence. So, _here and now_ there must be some cause that adds or imparts
existence to that essence. Otherwise Fido would not exist _here and now_ any
more than he did before he was conceived. He would ‘blink out’ of existence or
be annihilated. (2017, p. 126)

Critical and constructive commentary and engagement of Kerr (2015) can be
found in an entire issue—freely available in PDF format—in the journal
_Roczniki Filozoficzne_ here:
<https://ojs.tnkul.pl/index.php/rf/issue/view/175>

_Premise (20)_. Recall the premise: If act-potency pluralists cannot state
that everything is thus and so, then they cannot state their view. This is
clearly true, since act-potency pluralism, recall, states that everything
either a-exists or p-exists. This is a statement to the effect that everything
is thus and so. Hence, if act-potency pluralists cannot state that everything
is thus and so, then they cannot state their view.

In response, I note that no-change accounts do not hold that the _total set_
of an object’s real features comprises the object’s ‘state of existence’.
Instead, it only holds that the very _being_ (existence, actuality) of the
object _as such_ is a state or condition of stasis. The object’s very being or
existence is distinct from its continuously changing (accidental) real
features, since the object can retain its existence (i.e. persist as one and
the same substance) despite the gain or loss of such real (accidental)
features. Hence, the very existence or actuality of the object is not the same
as the total set of the object’s real features. (NB: I’m not here committing
to the thesis that there is such a thing as an object’s _being_ or
_existence_.) And it is this very substantial existence or actuality that the
accounts in question treat as a state or condition of unchangingness.

Why do I say P(F|CTST) << 1? Consider that for an object to persist for about
116 days is for it to persist approximately 10,000,000 seconds. And consider
that there are about 1044 Planck times in one second, and hence to persist for
about 116 days is to persist for about 1051 Planck times. Now, for each
(possible) Plank time in an object’s life, God is free to sustain the object
for that Planck time or refrain from so sustaining it, and this is true even
if God has sustained the object through previous Planck times. (It’s not as
though God suddenly becomes forced or compelled to continue sustaining an
object, and it’s not as though some moral obligation is newly imposed on him,
or whatever. These are unacceptable by the classical theist’s lights.) This
entails that for a given world w in which an object persists for (at least)
116 days and is then causally destroyed by something, there are about 1051
worlds in which that object ceases to exist at some point earlier than w due
to God’s withdrawal of sustenance. Moreover, under classical theism, God
remains utterly invariant across all worlds, and hence there is no difference
or variance on God’s end to which one could point in _any_ such world to
explain why **_it_** came about as opposed to some **_other_** world. Thus,
conditional on CTST, the expectation that w obtains—that is, that the single
world in which the object persists for 116 days (upon which it is finally
causally destroyed) obtains rather than any of the other 1051 worlds—is very
small. And hence the data of F, as applied to this 116-day-lived object, is
very unlikely conditional on CTST, whereas its probability is 1 conditional on
EIT. And hence EIT garners very strong evidential confirmation from F vis-à-
vis CTST. Much more can be said on this line of reasoning, but that suffices
for a brief sketch.

**Joe** : So, if there is no cause that induces S to cease to exist at m—that
is, if there is nothing that comes along to destroy S—then S will not cease to
exist at m. And in that case, S will persist to m. For you granted earlier
that S’s failing to exist m despite existing before m constitutes some kind of
change. In particular, it’s a change of state in the sense of an old state
passing away. And in that case, we get the conclusion that so long as nothing
destroys S from immediately before m through m, then S will exist at m. We
derived this in a manner that removes mystery as to why and how S exists at m.

[1] Schmid (2021) makes this point in connection with the criticisms of Feser
(2011). I’ve also made the point in my interactions with Feser. Cf. the two
posts [here](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/07/04/feser-on-schmid-
on-the-aristotelian-proof/) and
[here](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/07/11/feser-on-schmid-on-
existential-inertia-a-comprehensive-response/).

[T]he argument assumes that for a composite thing to exist, its parts have to
be unified by some _external_ cause. But why assume this? Why not suppose
instead that it is precisely some part of a composite thing that unifies its
parts, rather than something external? Or why not suppose that the fact that a
composite thing’s parts are unified is just an irreducible fact about it?

Instead of spelling out the rest of this section in detail, here is a bullet-
point list of some of the main takeaways:

**Joe** : Suppose something S exists immediately before a given moment m. Now,
for S to fail to exist at m despite existing immediately before m is for some
kind of change to occur. Of course, it’s not as though S undergoes some
alteration in this process, since S doesn’t become something different. But
still, there is _some_ kind of change here, whether in the ontological
inventory of what there is, or in the incorporation of what were previously
S’s parts into parts of something else, or in the passing away of a state, or
whatever.[10]

Third, even granting the objection’s central point about the miraculous (and
hence improbable) nature of God withdrawing his sustenance, this won’t
completely close the gap between the P(F|CTST) and P(F|n-EIT), and hence n-EIT
still garners some evidential confirmation vis-à-vis CTST from F. For by the
objection’s own lights, the probability of O’s cessation at any given
moment—even in the absence of destruction—is still non-zero, and this is all
we need to get at least some evidential confirmation for n-EIT vis-à-vis CTST.
(Things only get worse for CTST when we consider that there are boatloads of
such moments in O’s life.)

**Joe** : So, if there is no cause that induces the relevant change of state,
then there won’t be such a change.

[B]y revealing certain conditions as not changes in the relevant sense… we
rebut the need for a sustaining cause. … [A]s a change, the cessation of a
state requires a cause, and this in two possible ways: a cause acts so as to
terminate a state, or a sustaining cause ceases its activity. With the
continuation of a state, a cause is needed if the state is of the latter kind,
involving certain kinds of change within it, or if a cause which would
terminate the state needs to be inhibited. This leaves persisting states, as
with simply existing, or being oblong, seemingly without need, in general, of
any causes of their persistence, the most obvious reason being that
persistence does not involve change. If something is still around after many
years, this may well be remarkable, but that will be because it has somehow,
against the odds, survived threats to its integrity. ( _Ibid_ , p. 91)

The notion of concurrence is not obviously well-defined for relativistic
space-times because, according to orthodoxy, relativistic space-times do not
include objective simultaneity. But let’s put this worry aside for the moment
and focus on Newtonian and Galilean space-times. Plausibly, inertial theses
should affirm that, for each O within the scope of the inertial thesis, O’s
existence does not concurrently ontologically depend on any O* that is not
part of O. For, presumably, any composite O ontologically depends (at least in
some sense) on O’s parts. In order to maintain any plausibility, then,
inertial theses should allow _constitutive_ dependence. What Newtonian and
Galilean inertial theses should deny is that inertially persistent objects are
either concurrently caused by, grounded in, or realized by things numerically
distinct from and wholly _outside_ them—that is, by _non-parts_.

Disentangling these scope questions (and the questions in the subsequent
subsections) has largely been overlooked in the literature thus far. This is
unfortunate, since ruling out or justifying _one_ inertial thesis doesn’t
automatically rule out or justify _other_ inertial theses.

Gilmore proceeds by employing the notion of an _achronal surface_ (Gilmore
2008, p. 1228). In relativistic space-times, any space-time point A can bear
one of three relations to any other space-time point B: A is _light-like_
related to B just in case a signal moving at the speed of light can propagate
from A to B or from B to A; A is _time-like_ related to B just in case a
signal moving slower than the speed of light can propagate from A to B or from
B to A; and A is _space-like_ related to B just in case a signal cannot
propagate from A to B or from B to A. A surface is _achronal_ just in case any
two numerically distinct points on the surface are space-like related to each
other (for a formal definition, see Calosi and Fano 2015, p. 287). Here, we
use the term ‘surface’ in a fairly general way; an achronal surface can be a
three-dimensional slice of the space-time block. In fact, achronal surfaces
are, in some sense, the relativistic analogue of the three-dimensional spaces
located at distinct times that are included in Newtonian and Galilean space-
times. For Gilmore, O _persists_ just in case O has a path that is not
achronal. Put another way, O persists just in case O’s path includes two
space-time points that are either time-like or light-like related.

What’s more, Feser’s “solution” doesn’t seem to solve Parmenides’s puzzle. By
Feser’s own lights, change involves one kind of being—a given being-in-act
[e.g., being-warm-in-act]—arising from a state lacking that kind of being
(namely, a state involving a _different_ kind of being—being-in-potency [e.g.,
being-warm-in-potency]). In that case, though, Feser must admit— _along with
me_ —that something exists at t that did not exist at t-1—namely, the relevant
being-in-act.

The first of these worries is not an issue, though, for the principle can be
modified as follows: if x is F at time t, then either (a) at t, x’s being F is
caused by the principles of x’s intrinsic nature, or (b) at t, x’s being F is
(concurrently) caused from without by y. But as with the unmodified principle,
this modification succumbs to the second worry articulated above. There need
not be an extrinsic efficient sustaining _cause_ of x’s being F at t (when F
isn’t caused by x’s nature); there need only be an _explanation_ of x’s being
F at t.[4] And as we saw in Section 5, explanations abound for the
inertialist.

Things in which essence and _esse_ are distinct do not have existence in
virtue of what they are, since prior to their having existence they are
nothing; rather, they have it from without, i.e. extrinsically. But if
existing things have existence from without as distinct from their essences,
then they derive it from some cause distinct from themselves, in which case
existence is caused in them. Now, insofar as the subject of existence would be
nothing without this existence that it derives extrinsically, unless there
were a cause for the existence of the subject in which the latter participates
in order to be, the subject would be literally nothing; for it does not in
itself have the wherewithal to exist in itself. Hence, so long as such things
have _esse_ but are not identical to the _esse_ that they have, they are
causally dependent for their _esse_. (Forthcoming)

Although a foot causing an impression in some sand from eternity past is a
common example of a cause that does not precede its effect, we do not find the
example convincing. According to accounts on which causes are substances that
produce their effects, why think that the foot must have _produced_ the
impression in the sand? Consider, for example, a situation in which there
already existed an impression in some sand and, at some subsequent time, a
foot exactly matching the impression comes to rest in the impression. Although
one could argue that some cause needs to be posited to explain the shape of
the impression or to explain why the impression exactly matches the foot, the
foot would not be posited as the mediate cause of the impression. We can
consider moving the time that the foot comes to rest in the impression
arbitrarily far into the past. Points at positive or negative infinity are not
standardly included on the real line. Therefore, when we move the event of the
foot coming to rest in the impression infinitely far into the past, we remove
that event from the timeline altogether. Since, by construction, the
production of the impression occurred prior to the foot coming to rest in the
impression, we would also have removed the production of the impression from
the timeline. There would be no event involving the creation of the
impression. So, where some have argued that the foot is the eternal cause of
the impression, we can instead imagine that the foot and impression have
simply co-existed for all eternity without positing that one is the cause of
the other.[14] Whatever one might make of this argument, we think that there
is a deeper reason to deny simultaneous causation.

The argument Feser (2017, pp. 124-125) provides runs as follows. Existence
cannot _follow_ or _flow from_ the essence of an essence-existence composite;
nor can it impart existence to itself (for that would be self-causation).
There must, then, exist some extrinsic cause that imparts existence to an
essence-existence composite.

[3] A complication arises when we consider that, plausibly, _all_ global
explanatory hypotheses—including that purportedly delivered by the _De Ente_
argument—have one or more primitive (basic, fundamental, foundational, not-
further-explained) entities and (perhaps) properties (ese: predicates). For
instance, God (x) is good (F), but God’s being good, under classical theism,
is caused neither by God’s intrinsic nature nor an extrinsic principle. We can
set this complication aside, though, since (i) I am focused, in the main text,
on non-fundamental things and (ii) the principle can be modified to say
something like ‘if x is F, then (i) if we have sufficient, principled reason
to think x’s being F is a fundamental fact, then x’s being F is unexplained,
and (ii) if we don’t have sufficient, principled reason to think x’s being F
is a fundamental fact, then x’s being F is explained.’ Alternatively, we could
restrict the explanatory principle to (say) _contingent_ cases of x’s being F,
or cases where x is a _limited_ being (i.e., not a perfect or axiologically
supreme being), or whatever.

McCann, Hugh J. & Kvanvig, Jonathan L. (1991) “The Occasionalist Proselytizer:
A Modified Catechism,” in Philosophy of Religion, Philosophical Perspectives,
vol. 5, Philosophy of Religion, ed. James E. Tomberlin (Atascadero, CA:
Ridgeview Pub.), 587-615.

[I]n order for the chair to remain red at t + ε, the chemical microstructure
of the chair will have to continue being in a certain way. If the
microchemical structure of the chair were different, the chair would no longer
be red. So, it isn’t the case that the red chair can remain red at t + ε as
long as nothing intervenes. Rather… in order to retain ‘the redness,’
something outside of ‘the redness’ needs to be in place. (2020, p. 7)

Second, there exist a variety of ways that Oppy could engage this very
question. This was the entire project of the earlier sections on metaphysical
accounts of EIT. Oppy could make use of any of those metaphysical accounts of
EIT to explain persistence and answer the question McNabb and DeVito here
pose. Nothing in what McNabb and DeVito say here (and, moreover, nothing in
any of Feser’s proofs) rules out these alternative explanations of the
persistence (and, hence, existence-at-any-given-non-first-moment) of temporal
concrete objects.

But if such properties are uncaused, there is no explanation for why they
exist in the thing, that is, there is no explanation of why they are there.
Granted that it is a fact they are, such a fact is without explanation. . . .
If the objector grants that there is an intelligible framework within which
beings can be analysed and accounted for, then such uncaused non-intrinsic
properties must be primitive. ( _Ibid_ , p. 101)

Whatever belongs to a thing is either caused by the principles of its nature
(as the capacity for laughter in man) or comes to it from an extrinsic
principle (as light in the air from the influence of the sun). ( _De Ente_ ,
Cap. 4, p. 377: 127-3)

Finally, even if—contrary to what I’ve argued—their argument succeeds, the
conclusion, (7), is perfectly compatible with EIT, since EIT quantifies only
over temporal concrete objects or some _subset_ thereof, and the subset could
very well include only non-contingent (i.e., necessary) things.

Because the argument requires that God have an _esse_ or act of existence
different from creaturely acts of existence. Under such a view, God and
creatures _exist in different ways_. For suppose that God’s existence was the
same existence as creatures’ existence. Since God is identical to his
existence, it would follow that creatures’ existence _just is_ God. But this
is absurd for several reasons. First, with ordinary objects like “stones,
trees, dogs, human beings, and the like… there is in each of them a real
distinction between its essence and its existence” (Feser 2017, p. 122). The
distinction is _in_ objects, i.e., it is _within_ them or _intrinsic_ to them.
(At least, that’s how _I_ read the passage.) If I read the passage right, then
essence and existence are _component parts_ of ordinary objects. But God is
obviously not a component part of things. Second, “there is no such thing in
mind-independent reality as a thing’s essence existing apart from its
existence (whatever that would mean) or a thing’s existence existing apart
from its essence (whatever that would mean)” (2017, p. 123). But if a thing’s
existence is identical to God, then clearly a thing’s existence can exist
apart from its essence, since God can exist apart from anything else (had he
chosen to refrain from creating). Third, the argument says (or requires, or
entails, or whatever) that the existence of creatures must be caused by
something outside it—something which adds existence to its essence, as it
were. Thus, if God were identical to ordinary objects’ existence, then God
would be caused. But God is not caused. For these three reasons, it follows
that creatures’ existence is not identical to God (and hence God’s existence).
And as we’ve seen, this entails pluralism about being. Hence, the De Ente
argument requires pluralism about being: God and creatures exist in different
ways. God’s existence is not the same existence as creaturely existence.

In this understanding, then, existence is ‘built into’ everything’s nature in
the sense that existence is at least predicated essentially of everything.
(And, if we think existence is a property, then existence is an essential
property of everything within this understanding). But this doesn’t mean that
things automatically or necessarily exist. It doesn’t mean that x exists
_because_ existence is essential to x. An x would only be necessarily
existent, under this view, if _necessary existence_ were an essential property
of x (or if it were essentially predicated (truthfully) of x). But that isn’t
the proposal in question. And merely from the fact that existence is essential
to x, it doesn’t follow that x cannot cease to exist. All one needs to do is
cause any one of x’s essential properties to go out of existence in order to
cause x to go out of existence.

I’ll conclude this section by addressing Kerr’s recent criticisms of EIT in
his forthcoming article “Existential Inertia and the Thomistic Way to God”.
Kerr writes:

In response, this reply simply misses the dialectical context at hand. My
objection is an **_undercutting_** defeater. I don’t need to _positively
justify or spell out_ exactly what it is about prime matter and substantial
form that would, when combined, result in such a tendency. I need only point
out that nothing Feser says in his argument gives any reason for **_ruling
this out_** , and that ruling this out is what he would **_need_** to do for
his argument to succeed. In other words, I need only point out that Feser has
not given the hylemorphically-inclined existential inertialist who **_does_**
think that the form and matter, when combined, result in such a tendency
**sufficient reason to** _abandon_ **their position**. And so it is irrelevant
that I don’t specify exactly what it is about form and matter that, when
combined, results in such a tendency.

Finally, as with the previous objection, this objection doesn’t constitute an
argument against EIT _as such_. For this objection, like the previous one,
only applies to material objects. But we’ve already seen that inertialists
need not be wedded to materialism.

But what explains O’s _duration_ or _continuance through time_? For, in
principle, there are two ways for O to ‘not cease to exist’: O could either
exist _timelessly_ or else O could _persist_. Thankfully, Rundle provides
resources for explaining why we have a case of _persistence_ :

Unlike colour properties, there is no subject in which _esse_ can subsist and
remain, in which case the existence of any essence/ _esse_ composite does not
subsist in itself, but is caused therein; and without such a cause the
composite itself would cease to be. A thing cannot obtain _esse_ and retain it
by itself (like the chair becoming red and staying red), since a thing is
nothing in virtue of itself (whereas the chair is still something even if it
isn’t red). (Kerr Forthcoming)

On the contrary, given the distinction between essence and _esse_ , a thing is
nothing without its act of existence. Absent the act of existence, a thing
simply is not. It is not natural for an essence/ _esse_ composite to be,
precisely because _esse_ is not part of the essence of thing. The default
setting for a composite of essence and _esse_ is not to continue in being, but
to be nothing. Accordingly, there is indeed ‘something’ that needs to be
overcome for the composite of essence and _esse_ to be, and this is the
thing’s own nothingness; for as long as the essence/ _esse_ composite exists,
its own nothingness is being overcome through its possession of _esse_ , which
_esse_ it does not possess of itself but through another on which it depends.
(Forthcoming)

Steven Nemes offers an argument against EIT. I explain and respond to Nemes’
argument in [this blog
post](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2020/10/31/fact-checking-nemes-on-
existential-inertia/).

**_Existential Inertia Thesis (EIT)_** : For each member O of some (proper or
improper) sub-set of temporal concrete objects and for each time t such that O
exists at some time t* earlier than t, (i) at t, O does not ontologically
depend on the existence or activity of some concrete object O*, where O* is
not a (proper or improper) part of O, and (ii) if O is not positively
destroyed within the temporal interval [t*, t], then O exists at t.

For friends of Humean Supervenience, this is either a question about why a
specific collection of counterfactual statements have the truth values that
they have, e.g., why does O persists when O could have ceased to exist?, or a
question about a specific regularity, e.g., why does O persist unless
positively destroyed from without? Again, friends of Humean Supervenience will
say that the truth conditions for counterfactuals or for laws are provided by
the distribution of qualities on the fundamental arena and how that
distribution covaries across possible worlds. The counterfactual question can
then be answered by noting that at the closest possible worlds where O does
not persist, O is positively destroyed from without. The regularity question
can be answered by noting that in each of the instances where an object ceases
to exist, the object was positively destroyed from without. This drives home a
lesson for all law-based accounts of inertial persistence and not only those
committed to Humean Supervenience: the fact that there is a specific sort of
regularity concerning the persistence of objects should be explained in the
same way that regularities are explained in general and the fact that objects
persist unless specific conditions obtain should be explained in the way that
counterfactual facts are explained in general.

But prime matter by itself and apart from substantial form is pure potency,
and thus has of itself no tendency to persist in existence.

[27] Rundle does say that “in the absence of forces which would bring them to
an end, [objects’] continuation from moment to moment is in no need of
explanation” (2004, p. 93). Never mind Rundle’s precise view; we are concerned
with what resources Rundle’s reflections provide in explaining persistence.
For simplicity, we use ‘Rundle’s explanation’ rather than ‘an explanation that
can be gleaned from Rundle’s reflections’.

**_Transtemporal Explanans_** : (i) There is an absence of sufficiently
causally destructive factors operative on S from m-1 to m (where m-1 is the
moment immediately prior to m), and (ii) the state and/or existence of
temporal concrete objects (or, at least, those within EIT’s quantificational
domain) at a given moment at which they exist causally produces their
existence at the next moment provided that no sufficiently causally
_destructive_ factors are operative.[11]

While Baddorf focuses solely on the distinction between God and his property
instances, his central point is simply that it seems eminently plausible for
some wholes (e.g., the neo-classical God) to ground their ‘parts’. And this
isn’t an _ad hoc_ move, either; on one prominent view, tropes are
explanatorily posterior to (in virtue of being individuated by) their
substances.

_Relativistic Endurantist Existential Inertia Thesis (R-EEIT)_ : For each
member O of a (proper or improper) sub-set of spatio-temporal concrete objects
and for each surface a ∈ SCong(O) such that O exists on some achronal surface
a* ∈ SCong(O) and a* << a, (i) on a, O does not ontologically depend on the
existence or activity of some concrete object O*, where O* is not a (proper or
improper) part of O, and (ii) if O is not positively destroyed on any surface
s ∈ SCong(O) such that a* << s << a, then O exists on a.

Second, even granting such commitments, vicious explanatory circles are
metaphysically impossible _regardless_ of whether there’s an extrinsic cause
accounting for the viciously intertwined things. As we saw earlier, vicious
explanatory circularity entails that x causes or grounds y while y causes or
grounds x. This is impossible regardless of whether there is some z that
accounts for both x and y, since the very fact of the vicious circularity
entails that x is both prior and posterior to y, which is a contradiction. If
hylemorphism entails that two distinct things are viciously intertwined—such
that the existence of each explains the existence of the other—then that would
simply be a _reductio_ of hylemorphism. Far from demonstrating the need of an
extrinsic sustaining cause for any composite object, Feser’s step four imputes
a metaphysical impossibility to composite objects _from the get-go_. And if
Feser holds instead that x only causes or explains y in some respect distinct
from the respect in which y causes or explains x (in order to avoid
contradiction), then his argument no longer has teeth. For then there is _no_
vicious circularity, and hence the very means by which he motivated the need
for an extrinsic source of _both_ x and y is undercut.

[26] I follow Merricks in assuming the following: “monists take the
existential quantifier, ∃, to capture (what they say is) the one and only way
of being… That is, I shall assume that monists take the existential quantifier
to range over all and only those entities that enjoy (what they say is) the
one and only way of being. And I shall assume that pluralists take various
existential-like quantifiers—∃1, ∃2, etc.—to capture (what they say are) the
various ways of being” (2019, p. 593). Furthermore, as Merricks points out on
the same page, the anti-pluralist argument does not depend on such
quantifiers; for the arguments and debates at hand are not symbolic but
fundamentally _metaphysical_.

Schmid, J.C. (Forthcoming). Simply Unsuccessful: The Neo-Platonic Proof of
God’s Existence. _European Journal for Philosophy of Religion_.

The doctrine of Humean Supervenience can be generalized. Instead of
understanding the distribution of qualities as an assignment of qualities to
space-time points, we can instead understand the distribution of qualities as
an assignment of qualities to the fundamental arena, whatever the fundamental
arena turns out to be. For example, if, as David Albert, Barry Loewer, and
Alyssa Ney have argued, we should understand the wavefunction as a
distribution of qualities on a high dimensional configuration space, then
Humean Supervenience can be understood as the doctrine that there is,
ultimately, nothing but a distribution of qualities on a high dimensional
configuration space.

Now we can survey other authors’ articulations of EIT. Warning: they vary
wildly. In Section 3, I’ll bring significant clarity to these variations. For
now, though, I want to give you a survey.

To take an example I have often used, suppose you explain, to someone who has
never heard of them before (a young child, say), the nature or essence of a
lion, of a Tyrannosaurus Rex, and of a unicorn. Then you tell him that, of
these three animals, one exists, one used to exist but has gone extinct, and
the other never existed and is fictional. You ask him to tell you, based on
his new knowledge of the essences of each, which is which. Naturally, he
couldn’t tell you. For there is nothing in the essence or nature of these
things that could, by itself, tell you whether or not it exists. Existence is
something _additional to_ the essence of a contingent thing. It doesn’t follow
from such a thing’s essence. (2021)

I wish to address a final argument relating to contingent natures. The
argument is that (i) nothing about a contingent thing x requires that x
exist—i.e., nothing about x’s nature entails that x exists; (ii) if nothing
about x’s nature requires or entails that x exists, then there must be
something outside x that causes x to exist; (iii) if there must be something
outside x that causes x to exist, there must likewise be something outside x
that continuously sustains x in existence if x is to persist, since (a) x
retains precisely the same nature at each moment at which x exists, and (b)
x’s nature doesn’t entail or require x’s existence; from which it follows that
(iv) x requires an external sustaining cause. Hence, no contingent thing
inertially persists.

One common mistake is to entirely overlook that ‘existential inertia’ is
ambiguous. In particular, it is ambiguous between (i) the **thesis** of
existential inertia, which is a proposition that purports to describe the way
reality is and (ii) the **phenomenon** of existential inertia, which is the
manner in which things persist according to the Existential Inertia Thesis
(EIT). The thesis is just the claim that some temporal concrete objects
persist in the absence of both external sustenance/conservation and
sufficiently destructive factors. The phenomenon is the _actual persistence_
of one or more temporal concrete objects without external sustenance and
destruction. To refer to the thesis, I’ll typically use ‘EIT’. To refer to the
phenomenon, I’ll typically use ‘inertial persistence’.

In the next sub-sections, we will consider arguments against EIT deriving from
Feser’s various causal ‘proofs’ of God.[12]

_Objectual Necessity Account (ONA)_ : There exist one or more concrete objects
(call them ‘N’[21]) such that (i) N necessarily exists, (ii) N is temporal,
(iii) N is fundamental (i.e. N’s existence is not caused, grounded, or
realized by any more fundamental object), and (iv) N’s existence and/or
activity directly or indirectly explains (whether by causation, grounding,
constitution, or realization) the existence of every non-N temporal concrete
object at any moment at which it exists.

Beaudoin, J. (2007). The world’s continuance: Divine conservation or
existential inertia? _International Journal for Philosophy of Religion,_
61(2), 83-98.

(3) I have written on existential inertia (including some metaphysical
accounts thereof) in my response to Hsiao and Sanders
[here](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/02/02/response-to-hsiao-and-
sanders-on-existential-inertia-and-the-thomistic-contingency-argument/).

In principle, then, the inertial thesis leaves open whether it quantifies over
_all_ temporal concrete objects or instead only some _subset_ thereof. This
leaves open potential explanatory relations (grounding, efficient sustaining
causation, realization, etc.) that might obtain between the fundamental or
foundational temporal concrete objects and the non-fundamental, non-
foundational ones. Consequently, the inertial thesis, by itself, is compatible
with _some_ concurrent ontological dependence among temporal concrete objects.
As we shall see, my articulation of the inertial thesis will leave the fourth
scope question open.

I (really, we—DJ and I) have raised a dozen (or so) taxonomic questions for
inertial theses. In order to appreciate the larger picture, I’ve listed each
of the taxonomic questions below:

But, first, this response illicitly shifts the onus of justification. It is
_Kerr_ who is offering a _positive argument_ in the present dialectical
context. The onus is therefore not on the _detractor_ to _positively show_ how
there _could_ be an uncaused essence-existence composite; the onus, instead,
is on _Kerr_ to show how there _couldn’t_ be an uncaused essence-existence
composite. Without showing this, a claim key to the _De Ente_ argument is
simply unjustified. Second, even ignoring the illicit burden-shifting
maneuver, I’ve developed a variety of metaphysical accounts of EIT, and such
accounts—granting Kerr constituent ontology, realism about essences and _esse_
, and so on—represent workable accounts on which at least some essence-
existence composites continue to exist without continuously concurrent
sustenance from without. They therefore directly answer Kerr’s challenge to
spell out accounts on which an essence-existence composite can exist at a non-
first moment of its life without a (concurrent sustaining) cause.

4\. **Scope** : Do _all_ temporal concrete objects inertially persist or only
some proper _subset_ thereof?  
5\. **Persistence** : Will the existential inertia thesis understand
persistence in endurantist terms, perdurantist terms, or something else
altogether?  
6\. **Persistence** : How does persistence (and, thus, existential inertia)
relate to the findings of contemporary physics?  
7\. **Modal Register** : Is the inertial thesis _necessarily_ true if true at
all?  
8\. **Modal Register** : Do the temporal concrete objects within the domain of
quantification _actually_ persist without continual sustenance, or do they
merely persist _without requiring_ continual sustenance?  
9\. **Dependence** : What kind of ontological dependence is denied of
inertially persistent objects?  
10\. **Destruction** : What does it take to destroy inertially persistent
things, to make them cease to exist?  
11\. **Metaphysical Account** : In virtue of _what_ does inertial persistence
obtain (if it obtains at all)?  
12\. **Temporal Ontology** : What is the temporal ontology—encompassing (i)
the ontological status of moments of time, (ii) the objective un/reality of
temporal becoming, and (iii) the nature of persistence—within which the
inertial thesis is articulated and understood?

Every physical object began to exist. In that case, theists may argue that an
account should be given as to why physical objects began to exist at all. But
even so, our concern in this post is with the persistence of objects. And once
a given physical object O exists, the Aristotelian account can explain why O
persists.

As Feser points out, it seems entirely justifiable to understand uniform
spatial motion as a state of stasis or unchangingness. “But just as we can
understand uniform spatial motion as stasis or unchangingness,” writes Schmid,
“it seems we can equally justifiably understand _persistence in existence_ as
an _absence_ of change” (Forthcoming). “Indeed,” continues Schmid, “persisting
in existence is commonly thought not to involve change but rather the
maintenance of a state of actuality. … [W]e tend to think only that
_deviations_ from something’s state of non-existence or existence count as
changes (i.e. either coming into or passing out of being)” (Forthcoming).[28]

Third, it is false that inertial persistence would somehow require existence
to become built into something’s nature. By analogy, consider _inertial
location_. In particular, consider that spatial location is almost always
(perhaps always) numerically distinct from the essence of the thing occupying
said location. A cup, for instance, is distinct from a particular spatial
location, since the cup can exist _without_ being located at such a position.
(This shows, moreover, that such a spatial location is not even essential to
the cup, and nor does it ever ‘become built into the nature’ of the cup.) But
the mere fact that the cup’s particular spatial location is distinct from its
essence (and not even included in its essence as one of its essential
properties, and not even ‘built into it’) _doesn’t entail_ that the cup’s
being in this particular spatial location (at any moment at which it is _in_
such a location) requires some kind of continuously concurrent external causal
‘keeper’ or ‘sustainer’ of the cup’s being in said location. Indeed, the
opposite seems to be the case: we have good reason to think that no such
continuously concurrent sustenance is required in order for the cup to simply
retain its spatial position.

“But your argument there assumes that there is nothing about A and B such
that, _when combined_ , they’re able to manifest this further feature not
found in either of them individually. Think of it like wine. Wine has a flavor
none of its various constituents individually do.”

On the contrary; for such a tendency is not entailed by CT, and hence it
represents an auxiliary thesis that lowers the probability of the hypothesis
[and hence you gain greater expectability of the data only at the expense of
comparably lowering your prior].

Indeed, the fact of distinct x’s within a being—i.e., a multiplicity or
differentiation among numerically distinct ontological items—is precisely what
requires an extrinsic cause in Plotinus’ view. For Plotinus, the One’s
simplicity is utterly unqualified (Gavrilyuk, 2019, p. 442). At “Enn. 6.9.4
Plotinus observes that… the One transcends all differentiations characteristic
of being… Plotinian simplicity excludes any multiplicity” (Gavrilyuk, 2019,
pp. 447-448). Anything apart from the One requires a cause for the unity of
its multiplicity, distinction, differentiation, and qualification. Hence, for
Plotinus, a differentiation or multiplicity of distinct divine persons would
demand an extrinsic sustaining cause.

McNabb, T. & DeVito, M. (2020). Has Oppy Done Away with the Aristotelian
Proof? _The Heythrop Journal_ , 61(5), 723-731.

I will also note that it’s the first day of classes for Purdue tomorrow, so I
might not be able to continue this conversation further. You’re certainly
welcome to reply, it’s just I’m going to be very, very low on time starting
tomorrow. ❤

[14] For instance: that something “ _did_ exist simpliciter at one time… is
enough for it to bear a causal relation to me” (2019). To our minds, it also
seems deeply plausible upon reflection. For instance: plausibly, the
immediately temporally prior state, action, and/or obtaining of something can
explain the immediately temporally posterior obtaining of something else.

My fifth and final response to Feser’s PPC-based argument is that even if
successful, the argument isn’t an argument against EIT _as such_. Recall that
EIT quantifies over temporal objects _or some subset thereof_. But in order
for Feser’s argument to show that no temporal objects persist inertially, he
would have to show that every temporal object is a _material_ object. For only
then can he infer the denial of EIT from his conclusion (that ‘no material
substance has existential inertia’). But why should we accept this claim? Why
should we accept that any temporal object is a _material_ object? It seems
eminently plausible that there could, at least in principle, be a non-material
temporal thing. (Consider, for instance, the neo-classical theistic or
panentheistic God. Or consider neutral monism.)

“4. As evidenced by Oderberg’s position, the Classical Theist can take a view
according to which [contingent] things have a natural tendency toward
existing, which is nevertheless ultimately dependent upon God. On this view,
it seems like the Bayesian argument does not go through.”

In simpler terms, any object with a disposition D similarly has D’s
complementary disposition. Benocci argues that the principle is both
intuitively plausible and free from ontological commitments. For although it
may seem to require universals or tropes (since dispositions seem to be
properties of some kind), the Complementarity Principle can be recast in terms
that don’t quantify over dispositions _as such_ but instead merely on objects’
being disposed in certain ways:

As part of their defense of the A-theory of time and an absolute time
parameter, other authors (e.g., Mullins 2016b, p. 34; DeWeese 2004; Craig
2001a, 2001b) have pointed out that Special Relativity has been succeeded by
General Relativity, that a specific class of General Relativistic space-
times—Friedmann-Lemaitre-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) space-times—appears to pick
out a preferred way to cut space-time into three-dimensional surfaces, and
that the observable universe appears to at least approximate an FLRW space-
time. Each of the three-dimensional surfaces can then (supposedly) be
interpreted as a moment of absolute time and to pick out a collection of
space-time points, all of which are (supposedly) objectively simultaneous. If
this proposal succeeds, then endurance would again turn out to be no more
mysterious than endurance was in Newtonian or Galilean space-time.

[19] And this kind of internal explanation of unity, moreover, is not
restricted to neo-classical theists. Ingthorsson (2021, ch. 6) develops an
interactive view of causality informed by contemporary science and the
metaphysics of causation. Ingthorsson’s explanation of the unity and existence
of composite objects is of particular relevance to the Neo-Platonic proof. He
provides a number of reasons for thinking that the unity of composite material
objects is explained internally in terms of the causal, glue-like interactions
among parts. In contradistinction to NPCP’s requirement of an extrinsic source
or principle that causally sustains the unity, Ingthorsson cites _internal_
factors to do the explanatory work.

I actually address the argument you develop in your post in my post. I address
it in numerous places, but I think you be especially interested in Section 5
of this post [wherein I develop a host of explanations of contingent objects’
existence at non-first moments of their existence that don’t adduce a
sustaining cause] as well as Section 7 [wherein I address many criticisms of
EIT, many of which make essentially same point you made about things’
*remaining* contingent even at non-first moments of their existence. Feser,
for instance, makes this point in his Rationalist proof. I address it in
Section 7.6, Section 7.11, and other sections too.

[5] The same reasoning applies to non-theists who have principled reasons for
thinking that some layer of (say) natural reality (say, a necessarily existent
foundational quantum field, or the universal wavefunction, or whatever)
couldn’t be explained in principle. And such independent reasons aren’t too
difficult to come by: suppose one is convinced by Pruss and Rasmussen (2018)
that there is at least one foundational necessarily existent concrete object,
and suppose further that one has strong reasons to think theism is false
(deriving from, say, the problem of evil, or divine hiddenness, or religious
diversity and confusion, or paradoxes of omniscience or perfect rationality,
or whatever). Then, one has independent reason to think that there is some
non-theistic necessary being that is unexplainable in principle. And as I
point out in the main text, this will debar the need for a cause regardless of
whether such a being is an essence-existence composite.

In summary form, Schmid’s no-change account says that persistent existence is
a state of unchangingness or stasis.[30] By their very nature, states of
unchangingness deviate from their actual condition _only if_ there is some
positive disruption of their condition.

Audi’s characterization differs from the above: “Whatever exists is poised to
continue to exist if undisturbed and inactive” (2019, p. 2), where x’s being
poised to A implies that “there are circumstances C such that if x is in C, x
will A” (2019, p. 4). Audi continues: “By ‘undisturbed’, I mean not being
causally influenced by anything else. By ‘inactive’, I mean not undergoing
internal causal processes” (2019, p. 4). Moreover, for Audi, the domain over
which the thesis quantifies is _unrestricted_ : natural or supernatural,
structurally simple or complex, fundamental or non-fundamental, necessary or
contingent.

Before considering EIT’s theoretical virtues, let’s clarify the rival
hypothesis in this dialectical context:

Obviously, none of the aforementioned questions amount to _objections_. My
purpose in posing them is to illustrate that the timeless sustenance account
seems merely to _raise_ more questions than it answers. It only seems to
_multiply_ rather than _reduce_ mystery when it comes to explaining
persistence. _This_ is why I say it’s not at all clear that the timeless
sustenance account enjoys an explanatory advantage over Schmid’s propositional
necessity account.

If EIT is true for some contingent x, then existence _becomes_ part of x’s
nature upon x’s coming to be.

Here’s the problem with this step: even granting that wholes cannot
efficiently cause the existence of their parts, this by no means entails that
wholes cannot _explain_ their parts. We’ve already found defensible views
according to which wholes can non-causally explain (i.e., ground) their parts.
And because vicious explanatory circularity is impossible, it follows that in
cases of whole-to-part grounding, the parts do not explain the existence of
the whole.

_Rationalist Proof Causal Principle (RPCP)_ : Furthermore, that an individual
contingent thing persists in existence at any moment requires an explanation;
and since it is contingent, that explanation must be in some simultaneous
cause distinct from it.

Btw, I enjoyed your fourth objection so much that I actually added it to my
book manuscript! Here’s what I added:

“Whatever you think of such an argument, would it beg the question? Not if I
have independent grounds for being a theist. Hence, in response to such an
argument, an atheist would either have to give some argument against theism,
or show that the conclusion does not follow from the premises. It would not be
enough merely to accuse me of begging the question.”

[22] If the relation between N and non-N objects is one involving
_constitution_ , then N will not be an _outside_ or _external_ sustaining or
conserving explanation of the persistence of non-N objects—in which case,
given our articulation of EIT, both N and non-N objects would inertially
persist. But if the relation is one that _doesn’t_ involve N constituting
non-N objects, then only N will inertially persist. In either case, though,
EIT is true.

The first response to this proposal is that their cessation of existence is
not the robust kind required by CTST, since the heavy elements do not, along
with their parts, instantaneously annihilate. Second, recall that EIT only
quantifies over temporal concrete objects _or some subset thereof_. Hence,
even if spontaneously decaying particles do not inertially persist, this does
nothing to refute EIT. Third, the facts concerning the cessation of existence
of such elements are fully consistent with EIT. This is because such quick
cessations of existence are not utterly inexplicable (for that would destroy
the possibility of their scientific study!). Rather, they are _caused_ to
cease to exist, either by their intrinsic nature/character or by environmental
conditions unconducive to their perpetuation. But that means such elements are
not counterexamples to EIT, since they could easily be such that they persist
of their own accord for that short span of time and are interrupted in such
persistence by sufficiently destructive internal or external causal factors.

[11] Two notes. First: For simplicity, I here assume that time is composed of
smallest units termed _moments_. Nothing much hangs on this, though; I could
explicate each explanans in a continuous-time-friendly manner _mutatis
mutandis_. My more general point remains unaffected. Second: These are not the
_only_ explanantia under no-change and transtemporal accounts. I choose only
_one_ explanans from each of these two accounts for ease of exposition.

The above passage indicates a general structure of Rundle’s explanation of
persistence. Suppose some temporal concrete object O within EIT’s
quantificational domain persists from _t*_ to _t_ , where _t*_ < _t_. Here is
Rundle’s explanation of O persistence through this interval.

  2. Pingback: [Comments on Feser on Oppy on Thomistic Cosmological Arguments | Majesty of Reason](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/08/06/comments-on-feser-on-oppy-on-thomistic-cosmological-arguments/)

This isn’t proving too much; it’s the correct result. This is true: all forms
of theism face some evidential confirmation here. [And this just follows from
Bayes theorem, of course.] So it’s not proving too much; it’s just showing
that persistence evidence for a necessitarian view of persistence [i.e., it is
necessary that something persists in the absence of destruction and
sustenance] vis-a-vis non-necessitarian ones.

Second, it’s not at all clear that the timeless sustenance view enjoys an
explanatory advantage. For it only seems to _multiply_ rather than _reduce_
mystery. What, for instance, does the timeless-to-temporal explanatory
relation consist in? How can something timeless cause (or ground, or realize,
or whatever) temporal things? If a dynamic view of time is correct, wouldn’t
the timeless cause change at least in its relational properties, thereby
entailing _succession_ in its life (and, hence, temporality)?[19] Moreover,
why does the timeless cause seem to make a concerted effort to ensure that
objects only cease to exist once they are positively destroyed? This harkens
back to Oderberg’s observation: we witness things ceasing to exist _when and
only when_ they are subjected to destructive forces. But this seems wholly
mysterious if there is an altogether separate way for such objects to cease to
exist (namely, a withdrawal of timeless sustaining activity). If the timeless
sustainer genuinely _could_ remove its sustaining activity at any moment of an
object’s life, it becomes a mystery why this _never_ seems to occur for
objects ( _except_ when and only when the objects are subject to destructive
forces—but even in these cases, it is surely the _destructive factors_ , not
the withdrawal of timeless sustenance, that explain the object’s
cessation).[20]

[19] For example, assuming that _x_ is causally sustained by the timeless
cause, the timeless cause will arguably _acquire_ a relational (causal)
property once _x_ begins to exist and lose a relational (causal) property once
_x_ ceases to exist. To be sure, such changes need not be _intrinsic_ to the
timeless thing. There are plenty of cases where a subject gains or loses some
_relational_ property without undergoing _intrinsic_ change. (A father might
become shorter than his son solely because _his son has grown_.) But even in
such cases, the subject of the extrinsically relational change is _temporal_ ,
since it can only gain or lose the relational property if there are distinct
moments _m_ and _m*_ of its life at which the relational property is had and
then lacked (or vice versa).

[3] Note that when I speak of fundamental kinds of things in the context of
theoretical virtue comparison, I simply mean kinds of things that are not
analyzable in terms of or reducible to other kinds of things. This is a
separate issue from one such fundamental kind of thing (e.g., temporal things)
standing in a causal dependence relation to another such fundamental kind of
thing (e.g., a timeless thing or things).

Naturally, debates concerning divine aseity overlap quite heavily with the
considerations adduced above. According to divine aseity, God is “an
absolutely independent being—a being that does not depend on anything else for
its existence” (Fowler 2015, p. 115). One of the principal motivations for DDS
derives from aseity. If there were some item intrinsic to but distinct from
God—that is, if God had some part—then God would be dependent on something
that is distinct from God. As Aquinas writes, “every composite is posterior to
its component parts, and is dependent on them; but God is the first being” (
_Summa Theologiae_ I, q3 a7). One influential response to this line of
reasoning derives from what Fowler calls the _Doctrine of Divine Priority
(DDP)_ : “For all x, if x is a proper part of God or x is a property of God,
then x depends on God for its existence” (2015, p. 122). And since dependence
is asymmetric, God does not depend on God’s parts. Like Baddorf, then, Fowler
offers whole-to-part grounding as a viable model for understanding divine
aseity and the independence of at least one whole.

A second tendency-disposition account is found in Benocci (2018), who
emphasizes that “endurance theorists do not need any special metaphysical
principle or postulate to account for existential inertia” (2018, p. 59).
Benocci appeals to dispositions, which “consist in displaying a certain kind
of manifestation under a certain kind of condition or stimulus” (2018, p. 60).
He begins with an intuitive principle according to which changes an object
undergoes reveal the presence of a corresponding disposition of which the
relevant change is a manifestation. More precisely, “if an object a undergoes
a change _m_ in the circumstance _c_ , then it has the disposition to undergo
a change of kind M in circumstances of kind C, with _m_ being a change of the
kind M and _c_ being a circumstance of the kind C” (2018, p. 60). He also
defines a _trivial_ _disposition_ as a disposition that manifests in all
possible circumstances.

But this is a non-sequitur. Suppose we think x is F essentially if and only if
necessarily, if x exists, then x is F. This is a typical formulation of what
is at least logically equivalent to (though probably not an informative
_analysis_ of) essentiality. In this case, though, existence is essential to
everything, since it’s trivial that, necessarily, if x exists, then x exists.

For example, on Armstrong’s version, the nomic regularity that _all Fs are Gs_
is explained by the truth of the statement that N(F, G), where N is a sui
generis relation between the universals F and G. [Here’s something that I just
learned about Armstrong’s account: for Armstrong, universals are _parts_ of
states of affairs and states of affairs are concreta. So, while we could
conceive of a view where the necessitation relation is a relation between
abstracta, that’s not how Armstrong’s view works. Apparently, Armstrong
discusses this issue in his book _A World of States of Affairs_.]

Here’s another response to Feser’s vicious circularity charge.
Suppose—contrary to what I believe—that existential inertia is a property.
This would only be problematic if we accepted the controversial thesis that
properties ground character—i.e., that it is in virtue of possessing
(exemplifying, instantiating) (say) the property _redness_ that something is
red. But suppose we reject this thesis and adopt its opposite: it is rather in
virtue of being red that something possesses the property _redness_. Under
this anti-character-grounding view, it is simply false— _pace_ Feser—that
existential inertia’s being a property entails that the water exists at m (or
persists from m-1 to m) because it has the property of existential inertia.
Rather, the substance has the property of existential inertia because it
exists at m (or persists from m-1 to m) in an inertial fashion. So _even if_
existential inertia were a property, Feser’s argument still wouldn’t work.

Here’s a possible objection: just as the the classical theist objects to the
Neo-Humean that the Humean mosaic is brute and so cannot deliver on an
explanation of a hierarchical series, why wouldn’t the classical theist say
that the DTA account’s necessitation relations are yet another collection of
brute facts that cannot deliver on an explanation of hierarchical series?

_Premise (23)_. This premise says that if act-potency pluralists should not
accept generic existence, and if their not accepting generic existence implies
that they should not accept act-potency pluralism, then act-potency pluralists
should not accept act-potency pluralism. Like (20) and (21), I take this to be
clearly true. It seems eminently plausible (if not self-evident) that if S
should F, and if <S does F> implies <S should Y>, then S should Y. If—given my
evidence—I should believe the Earth is round, and my believing the Earth is
round implies that I should act as if the Earth as round, then surely it
follows that I should act as if the Earth is round. I think, then, that
premise (23) is on good footing.

Here is a slightly more formalized articulation of EIT. This more formalized
articulation is cast I terms of endurantism. But nothing hangs on this—a
similar thesis can be developed _mutatis mutandis_ for perdurantism. [I
develop such theses in Section 4 below.] Here, then, is the thesis:

[31] Of course, it’s not as though O undergoes some _alteration_ in this
process. But still, it is obvious that there is _some_ kind of change here,
whether in the ontological inventory of what there is, or in the incorporation
of what were previously O’s parts into parts of something else, or in the
passing away of a state (e.g., the state of O’s existence), or whatever. If
the reader still demurs at my use of ‘change’, I can alter the account to
speak of _changes of state_ (i.e., cases where some new state comes to be or
some old state passes away).

While friends of Humean Supervenience would say that the classical theist’s
standard of metaphysical explanation is alien to their project and is, at any
rate, inappropriate, there is another account of laws for which the classical
theist’s objection cannot be applied. That is, there are anti-Humean accounts
of laws, according to which there _are_ necessary connections between distinct
existences. Anti-Humean accounts of laws are united not only by their denial
of Humean Supervenience, but also by the modal status that they assign to
laws. Lewis held to the free recombination principle. The free recombination
principle is a principle about how the space of metaphysically possible worlds
can be formally constructed. Roughly, Lewis held that, given two numerically
distinct possible worlds W1 and W2, a third world W3 can be generated by
conjoining space-time regions from W1 and W2. (Caveats need to be deployed
about the two regions having, e.g., geometrically and topologically compatible
boundaries.) If, contrary to Lewis, we accept that there are necessary
connections between distinct existences, then the necessary connections will
constrain both the space of metaphysically possible worlds (e.g., perhaps,
given the nature of fire, there is no possible world where fire exists and
fire fails to burn) and the relations between worlds (e.g., given the elevated
status that laws enjoy on anti-Humean accounts, nearby possible worlds will be
those where the laws are satisfied).

To begin with (i), that there are no uncaused non-intrinsic properties, it
must be borne in mind that Aquinas applies his causal principle so as to
account for a fact requiring explanation: that is to say, if one can ask and
answer the question of why a thing possesses a certain property, then one can
offer a causal explanation for the possession of that property. ( _Ibid_ , p.
100)

This entry was posted in
[Uncategorized](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/)
by [Majesty Of
Reason](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/author/majestyofreason/).
Bookmark the [permalink](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/07/31/so-
you-think-you-understand-existential-inertia/ "Permalink to So you think you
understand Existential Inertia?").

For concrete object O and times t-1 and t (where t-1 is immediately temporally
prior to t), the existence of O-at-t is explained by the conjunction of (i)
the state and existence of O-at-t-1 and (ii) the absence of any sufficiently
causally destructive factors acting on O-at-t-1 and through t. (2021, p. 205)

ONA is inertialist-friendly because N is one or more temporal concrete objects
that persist in existence in the absence of both destruction and conservation
from without. Six notes, though, are in order.

[4] Once more, the same reply can be offered with a _non-theistic_ necessary
foundation _mutatis mutandis_.

As Feser recognizes, however, this reasoning is incomplete. For even if
successful, it does not entail the need for _concurrent_ , existential causal
sustenance of essence-existence composites—for all the reasoning shows, the
object may very well need to be _brought into_ existence (thereby effecting
composition between essence and existence, if we must speak this way).
Thereafter, however, the union of the two may very well be inertial.

My second response is that “something in which essence and existence are
distinct does not possess _esse_ of itself but through another on which it
depends” is ambiguous. The dependence in question could mean concurrent,
sustaining causal dependence, or it could mean explanatory dependence. If it’s
the former, then Kerr’s response above simply begs the question—it is the very
question at issue whether things that don’t exist of themselves (i.e., as a
result of their natures) depend on concurrent, sustaining causes in order to
exist. But if it’s the latter, then the inertialist can _agree_ that things
that don’t exist of themselves require an explanation for their (continued)
existence. For there are whole panoplies of inertialist-friendly explanations
thereof. To be sure, this provides Kerr no reason to abandon Kerr’s position;
but, of course, the same is true of Kerr’s response—it provides inertialists
no reason to abandon such metaphysical accounts.

In fact, this is precisely what non-classical theists hold. Under both
classical _and_ non-classical models of God, the unique foundation of reality
is a metaphysically necessary, unlimited, axiologically supreme, perfect being
upon which everything else depends. But so long as the non-classical theist
has principled reason to think that a perfect being exists, they thereby have
a principled reason to think that this perfect being’s existence is _uniquely
unexplained_. And this is true _regardless_ of whether this perfect being is
such that its essence is numerically distinct from its existence, since God’s
status as uniquely unexplained simply falls out of his perfect and unlimited
nature. It is intuitively obvious that perfection—axiological supremacy and
unlimited value—precludes dependence on something else. In that case, there is
independent reason to think that a perfect being—even if (under non-classical
theism) the being’s essence and existence are distinct—is uniquely unexplained
(and, indeed, unexplainable).

A sixth mistake is thinking that EIT is inherently atheistic. This is false.
Suppose—along with neo-classical theists—that God is temporal. And suppose God
creates and sustains everything apart from himself. In this case, EIT is true:
God is a temporal concrete object that persists without being externally
sustained and without being destroyed. Hence, some subset of temporal concrete
objects persist in the manner EIT describes. Hence, EIT is true. Hence, EIT is
not inherently atheistic. EIT only debars a scenario in which every temporal
concrete object is sustained or conserved in being from without. This is
perfectly compatible with theisms that render God temporal, and it’s also
compatible with theisms that afford God no role in explaining the _continued_
existence of (some) temporal concrete objects.

I conclude that the objection at hand—while valuable and suggestive—fails to
avoid my argument for EIT.

If existence becomes a non-essential feature of x, then the existence of x is
both prior to and posterior to itself.

With generic monism and pluralism articulated, we can now consider a specific
form of pluralism. This brand of pluralism—what we might call _act-potency
pluralism_ —recognizes two different ways of being: being-in-act and being-in-
potency. Thus:

Oppy, G. (2021). On Stage One of Feser’s ‘Aristotelian Proof’. _Religious
Studies_ , 57(3): 491–502.

I have left two more ways of characterizing positive destruction: the positive
destruction of enduring and perduring objects in _relativistic_ space-times. I
postpone characterizing these until Section 4 where I’ll introduce some
additional formalism. For now, I turn to the penultimate taxonomic question.

A fifth family of accounts could be termed _no-change accounts_. These
accounts view persistence as an _absence_ of change and take this fact to be
central to their inertialist-friendly explanation of persistence. No-change
accounts are developed in Rundle (2004), Oppy (Forthcoming, p. 4), and Schmid
(2021; Forthcoming).[27] Because Oppy does not develop the account in much
detail, we will focus on Rundle’s and Schmid’s renditions.

According to Oderberg, the charge of circularity is misguided. An object has
the tendency to persist “because it exists _as a certain kind of thing_. …
[A]ll concrete objects… have it because of the kind to which they all belong,
namely, _concrete object_. So concrete objects have the tendency to continue
to exist because they exist as concrete objects” ( _ibid_ ). Oderberg explains
that such objects “do not exist as concrete objects because they have the
tendency to continue to exist”, thus avoiding vicious circularity ( _ibid_ ).
Answering the question of why they exist as concrete objects would appeal to
some “fundamental metaphysical analysis” rather than “some property or other
of the object” ( _ibid_ ).

Second, suppose—contrary to what I’ve argued—that Feser did show or render
plausible the claim that contingent things do not enjoy existential inertia.
This does not entail that EIT is false. For EIT quantifies over a _subset_ of
temporal concrete objects. The inertialist could simply hold that while
_contingent_ things do not inertially persist, there is nevertheless some
foundational _necessary_ temporal concrete object(s) that inertially persists.
(Theist-friendly examples include the neo-classical or panentheistic temporal
God, while non-theist-friendly examples include one or more foundational
quantum fields, or a spatiotemporal wavefunction, or a collection of
fundamental particles, or whatever.) In this case, it is _false_ that nothing
about the necessary foundation demands its existence or its persistence;
indeed, the opposite is true. Hence, even if—contrary to what I’ve
argued—Feser’s argument works, EIT is not threatened. (To be sure, Feser might
try to adduce _other_ arguments claiming that only the classical theistic God
could be necessarily existent. But that is a separate argument from the one
under consideration, and my sole purpose here is to point out that the
argument under consideration need not move an inertialist to abandon their
position.)

Clearly the Trinitarian God cannot have an extrinsic sustaining cause of its
being. But what, then, could explain the unity of the distinct persons in God?
If the answer is that there’s no explanation, then that seems to be a
perfectly legitimate move for the detractor of the Neo-Platonic proof in
explaining the most fundamental composite thing(s). If the answer is that it’s
simply metaphysically necessary that there be three distinct persons unified
in one God, then that also seems to be a perfectly legitimate move for the
detractor of the Neo-Platonic proof.

Something has existential inertia if and only if it has of itself a tendency
to persist in existence once it exists.

With taxonomic questions concerning persistence thus covered, we turn to our
next set of taxonomic questions concerning modal register.

Note, moreover, that nothing in the inertial thesis demands quantification
solely over material objects. Perhaps neutral monism is true, or perhaps there
exist non-physical temporal concrete objects (like a panentheistic or neo-
classical theistic God, say). I take no stance on such matters here. But so
long as such temporal objects persist in existence without some kind of
conserving activity that continuously keeps them in being, they inertially
persist. Existential inertia is fundamentally about continuance in existence
in the absence of both (i) conserving or sustaining activity from without and
(ii) sufficiently destructive factors. The inertial thesis thus applies to
temporal concrete objects satisfying (i) and (ii) regardless of whether those
objects are material or immaterial, physical or non-physical, necessary or
contingent.[3]

This entails that if p genuinely goes from being true to being false, then it
can’t _remain the case_ that one knows p. For if it remained the case that one
knows p, then since knowing p presupposes p’s truth, it would follow that p
_itself_ remained true. But _ex hypothesi_ , p went from being true to being
false and hence didn’t remain true. Thus, if some things go from being true to
being false, then God goes from knowing them to not knowing them.

We will let ∃a (‘there a-exists’) range over all and only those entities that
a-exist and ∃p (‘there p-exists’) range over all and only those entities that
p-exist. Because ∀xFx iff ~(∃x~Fx), act-potency pluralists endorse parallel
biconditionals: ∀axFx iff ~(∃ax~Fx) and ∀pxFx iff ~(∃px~Fx). ‘∀axFx’ is read
as ‘everything that a-exists is F’ while ‘∀pxFx’ is read as ‘everything that
p-exists is F’. Neither ∀a nor ∀p are fully general, in which case act-potency
pluralists—at least those that don’t accept generic existence (which will be
defined below)—don’t have a universal quantifier.

The inertial theses of Schmid and Audi only deny the concurrent efficient
_causal_ dependence of inertially persistent objects on other things. But this
seems too weak. Suppose all temporal concrete objects have a sustaining
explanation _not_ in terms of an efficient cause but instead in terms of a
_ground_.[6] In that case, every temporal concrete object is concurrently
dependent on some ground. And surely no temporal objects in this scenario
enjoy existential inertia. Consequently, inertial theses should deny more than
(concurrent) efficient _causal_ dependence. One dependence question, then, is:
what kind of ontological dependence is denied of inertially persistent
objects?

Thus, the NPCP is dead on arrival when it comes to arguing against EIT.
Nevertheless, let’s continue with our appraisal of it, since we can glean
insights therefrom.

For Beaudoin, then, the explanation of why inertially persistent object O
continues to exist is the following conjunction: (i) the only power capable of
annihilating O has thus far been unexercised, and (ii) O lacks a tendency to
spontaneously disappear. For if O lacks such a tendency, then O will not
spontaneously disappear unless some sufficiently destructive or annihilating
factor—whether intrinsic or extrinsic to O—comes along to destroy O. This is
part and parcel of what tendencies involve: O has a tendency to manifest some
outcome or undergo some process in conditions C if and only if O, when placed
in C, manifests said outcome or undergoes said process.[3] Thus, if O _lacks_
a tendency to spontaneously annihilate (disappear, cease to exist) in
conditions C—say, when not subjected to sufficiently destructive or
annihilating factors—then O, when placed in C, will not annihilate. And
provided that O is in C—provided that there is an absence of sufficiently
destructive or annihilating factors, as specified by condition (i) of the
abovementioned conjunction—it follows that O will not annihilate (i.e.,
disappear or cease to exist) but will instead persist.

In fact, even if oxygen _were_ such a sustaining cause, it’s not at all clear
that there is anything external to oxygen that causally sustains _it_ in
being. (Note that the covalent bond holding the two oxygen atoms together is
_within_ the oxygen molecule and consists in the sharing of electrons
therein.) Hence, even if we _could_ pinpoint a few examples of sustaining
causes of existence, they are rare. Finally, the causal activity of the table
is nothing to the very _existence_ of your laptop. The table does not sustain
your laptop as an efficient cause of its very being. This example, then, also
fails. Overall, then, it seems we lack good experiential reason to affirm the
existence of sustaining causes of existence—precisely what we would expect if
EIT were true (at least assuming a version of EIT with a wide quantificational
domain).

A second thing to note is that EIT is actually compatible with non-existence
being the default state for everything contingent and the further claim that
anything for which non-existence is the default state require concurrent
sustenance in order to exist moment-by-moment. For EIT, again, quantifies only
over temporal concrete objects _or some subset thereof_ , and hence EIT might
be false for contingent temporal concrete objects while true for some
necessary temporal concrete object(s).

[13] For a defense of the simultaneity of causation, see Mumford and Anjum
(2011, ch. 5) and Ingthorsson (2021, chs. 4 and 5). DJ Linford has written the
follwoing reply to the rejoinder from simultaneous causation, not Joe.

My [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0sBygsaG03c), “Arguments Against
Classical Theism | Part 1/3” and the forthcoming Parts 2 and 3

[I]t is that matter’s potential to exist as _water_ that is being actualized
right now. Why? It is no good to answer that such-and-such a process occurred
at some time in the past so as to combine the hydrogen and oxygen in just the
right way. That tells us how the water _got_ here, but that is not what we are
asking about. It is also no good to point out that nothing has yet come along
to separate out the hydrogen and oxygen. That tells us how the water might
someday go out of existence, but that isn’t what we’re asking about either.
What we’re asking about, again, is what _keeps_ the water in existence at any
instant at which it does in fact exist. (2017, p. 26)

Thus, if Parmenides or Feser wants to show why the view I’ve outlined entails
some problematic “being arising from non-being,” they need something more than
the mere assertion of _ex nihilo nihil fit_. For in my view, x doesn’t “come
from nothing”—x instead comes from a prior cause (or explanation). This
doesn’t require x to exist in some ghostly or ethereal “state of potency”
prior to x’s coming about. In the analysis I’ve sketched, (i) there is change,
(ii) there is no problematic instance of being arising from non-being, and yet
(iii) change doesn’t involve the transition or reduction from potential being
to actual being. And so premise (1) is false.

According to Maudlin, there is a _sui generis_ class of statements that report
laws. Unlike Neo-Humeans—who reduce laws to patterns of qualities—or friends
of platonic accounts—such as Dretske, Armstrong, and Tooley, who reduce laws
to relations between universals— or Aristotelians—who reduce laws to the
essences or natures of objects—Maudlin maintains that laws are irreducible and
so cannot be explained in terms of anything else.

In any case, the live possibility (and, I would argue, plausibility) of whole-
to-part grounding renders Feser’s step one far from demonstrated. It is not at
all clear that any whole whatsoever depends on its parts, and there are
plausible views in mereology and metaphysics according to which this step
comes out false. Nothing in Feser’s step justifies a denial of these
mereological and metaphysical positions. I conclude, then, that step one
fails.

“For while God could in principle annihilate some objects, that would count as
a miracle (a suspension of the natural order) which, by definition, is
irregular. Hence, like EIT, it would be far more likely for us to observe
things persisting in existence.”

Consider again NPCP’s primary motivation: explicability. More specifically,
the compresence of distinct elements together into a unified being demands
some explanation—and because the explanation cannot be in terms of the being
itself or one of its parts, an extrinsic cause (so the argument goes) is
required.

[8] Indeed, those unsympathetic to existential inertia—that is, those who hold
that all temporal concreta are sustained or conserved in existence from
without—are entirely free to recognize the legitimacy of transtemporal
explanations. Consider, for instance, Pruss: “Plausibly, your existence at
earlier times causes your existence at later times” (2018, p. 167). For
further discussion/justification of transtemporal explanatory relations, see
Schmid (2021) and Swinburne (1994, pp. 81-90). Note, though, that
transtemporal accounts do not say that all causation is non-simultaneous.
(Indeed, they are not _necessarily_ wedded to viewing the relevant
transtemporal explanatory relation as causal, as we’ve seen.) Final note: one
objection to transtemporal accounts derives from the conjunction of presentism
and the thesis that explanatory relations are existence-entailing. I respond
to this objection in Schmid (2021).

The second account Kerr considers is, broadly speaking, a tendency-disposition
account: “a thing does not tend to non-existence which tendency needs to be
overcome by a cause of existence; rather the default mode is for the thing to
remain in existence until some cause knocks the thing out of existence” (Kerr
Forthcoming). In response to this account, Kerr writes:

Before turning to transtemporal accounts, I want to highlight Oderberg’s
_motivation_ for belief in the tendency to persist. He points out, first, that
“[i]t is not as though objects cease to exist under such a variety of
circumstances that we cannot, even in principle, find anything common to them”
( _ibid_ , p. 351). Instead, there is little mystery about the conditions
under which objects cease to exist: “They cease to exist when and only when
forces act upon them” ( _ibid_ ). This is not some brute fact, “any more than
if it were the case that all objects ceased to exist when and only when in the
vicinity of objects twice their size” ( _ibid_ ). We need some account of why
there is such commonality among ceasing to exist. According to Oderberg, this
is explained in terms of a tendency to cease to exist, a tendency whose
manifestation conditions involve “destruction by the application of forces” (
_ibid_ ). This tendency to cease, moreover, “depends ontologically on the
tendency to continue to exist in the absence of those forces. Nothing can
cease to exist in certain conditions unless it already continues to exist
prior to those conditions” ( _ibid_ ). Oderberg is here appealing to some
version of the complementary principle adduced by Benocci.

If oxygen, heat, and so on were sustaining causes of your existence, then you
would instantly die in their absence. But upon removing oxygen, heat, and so
on, you do not die instantly but only after a short period of time. Therefore,
oxygen, heat, and so on are not sustaining causes of your existence. (Keep in
mind, moreover, that EIT only denies (for objects within its quantificational
domain) conservation or sustenance _from without_. Hence, the fact that you
are dependent on certain components of you (e.g., your brain, your bones, the
blood and sugar and lipids in your body, the oxygen in your lungs, etc.) is
neither here nor there.) In fact, the only reason why removing oxygen from the
external environment will eventually result in your death is that it
facilitates the absence of oxygen _within_ you, which in turn facilitates cell
death _within_ you. And it is _this_ that kills you. But we have already seen
why your dependence on factors _within_ you is perfectly compatible with
EIT.[2]

  4. Pingback: [Comments on Feser on Oppy on Thomistic Cosmological Arguments - Welcome](https://www.josephschmid.com/2021/08/06/comments-on-feser-on-oppy-on-thomistic-cosmological-arguments/)

This won’t happen inexplicably—there will be some explanation for why it
happens. Ordinarily, something will _causally produce_ (or _causally destroy_
) x. The only sense in which we have “being arising from non-being” here is
the entirely unproblematic sense in which x didn’t previously exist but now
exists. There is nothing absurd about this. It’s not like something is
springing into being uncausedly and inexplicably. _That_ , I tend to think,
_would_ be absurd. But that isn’t the proposal.

Schmid leaves open the precise nature of the relevant transtemporal
explanatory relation, allowing the relation to be either causal or non-causal.
According to Schmid’s account, then, O’s persistence is explained by (i) the
absence of sufficiently causally destructive factors operative on O, plus (ii)
transtemporal explanatory relations (causal or otherwise) obtaining between
the temporally successive states of O’s life (so to speak).

Recall that Kerr is interested in whether (i) there could be any uncaused non-
intrinsic properties of a thing, and, more specifically, (ii) whether
existence could be uncaused in one or more essence-existence composites.
Having argued that his case against (i) fails, I will now turn to his case
against (ii). He writes:

TPCP denies EIT which, you will recall, states (roughly) that temporal
concrete objects (or some subset thereof) persist in existence in the absence
of sustenance and destruction. Because temporal objects are (we can grant
_arguendo_ ) things in which essence and existence are distinct, the truth (or
rational defensibility) of EIT would (or does) undermine the Thomistic proof.
And as we’ve seen, the arguments thus far articulated against EIT in the
literature can be met, and there are also many _motivations_ for holding the
inertialist view.

The central metaphysical question any inertial thesis must be supplemented
with runs: in virtue of _what_ does inertial persistence obtain (if it obtains
at all)? Answers to this question are _metaphysical accounts_ of existential
inertia—coherent stories on which persistence is explained in inertialist-
friendly terms (i.e., terms which include commitment to some temporal concrete
objects persisting without external conservation—or, at least, terms which do
_not_ commit to the thesis that every temporal concrete object is continuously
conserved from without.).

[1] But suppose you deny this. Suppose, in other words, that in order for x to
metaphysically explain y, x _need not_ be prior to y. Then it’s not at all
clear that an essence couldn’t metaphysically explain its existence despite
being distinct therefrom, since—per the supposition—the former _need not_
exist _prior_ to its existence in order to _explain_ its existence. Thus, the
absurdity that led us to deny that an essence could explain its existence
(from which it is distinct) would be removed.

Laws are explained by the natures or essences had by the objects that fall
under the scope of nomic regularities. The chief defender of this view in
contemporary philosophy is Brian Ellis—need to get some good citations for
Ellis’s work. Note, also, that, at least according to Thomas Kuhn, this is the
view that comes closest to that deployed in contemporary physics, albeit
without the Aristotelian notion of fundamental (or irreducible) efficient
causation.

This was the view endorsed by early modern French atheists, such as Julien
Offray de la Mettrie, Denis Diderot, and Paul Henri Baron d’Holbach. As
theologian Michael J. Buckley describes d’Holbach’s view, “Motion as a result
or inherent attribute of matter gives natural philosophy its own enclosed
world, its own principle, and eliminates the natural theologies of either the
religious believer or the deist. Matter carries the attributes of god. It is
the necessary being. It is contradictory, inconceivable, to imagine a moment
when it did not exist. And since motion is a necessary property of matter, it
is coeval with matter” (Buckley 1987, pg 282). Here’s a quote Buckley provides
from d’Holbach that I should find in the Systeme: “Motion is a manner [of
being], which matter derives from its own proper existence”.

Furthermore, note that the explanation here does _not_ adduce some further,
additional component C that unifies or combines A and B. The question Feser
poses, then, as to what unites or combines C with A and B is a non-starter.

If there is change, then if there is no distinction between act and potency,
then being arises from non-being.

[1] See earlier in this post for more on the relationship between pluralism
and Feser’s own rendition of a broadly _De Ente_ -esque argument he terms the
‘Thomistic proof.’

Overall, then, I do not think that EIT is theoretically any more virtuous than
CTST.

I do not recall saying or implying that this is distinctively a problem for
*classical* theism. Yes, I’m focusing on CTST. But that doesn’t mean I think
it’s *distinctively* a problem for classical theism; it just means I think
it’s a problem for classical theism. Showing that there’s Bayesian
disconfirmation of H1 vis-a-vis H2 doesn’t mean or imply that H2 is *uniquely*
disfavored by the data in question.

A seventh mistake is thinking that defenders of EIT always have a burden to
positively justify the truth of EIT. This is false. Whether the defender of
EIT has a burden to positively justify the truth of EIT depends on the
dialectical context at hand. If the context is one wherein someone is
proffering a positive argument for classical theism one of whose premises
requires the falsity of EIT, all the defender of EIT needs to do is argue that
nothing in the argument—that is, nothing in the relevant premise or what is
said on its behalf—gives those who accept (or are neutral on) EIT _sufficient
reason to **abandon** their position_. The onus, in this context, is **not**
on the defender of EIT to _positively justify_ EIT and prove that the premise
in question is _false_ (by proving EIT _true_ ). They need only show that the
**argument** (and what’s said on its behalf) fails to prove EIT **false**.

My aim in this section is to categorize and develop metaphysical accounts of
EIT—that is, explanations of persistence on which EIT holds (or can hold).
This includes tendency-disposition accounts (§5.1), transtemporal accounts
(§5.2), law-based accounts (§5.3), necessity accounts (§5.4), and no-change
accounts (§5.5).

Justification: it’s manifest and evident to the senses. Many in your audience
will get that reference.

Once again, this is obviously true. (Moreover, I have already explained why
it’s true earlier in this post.)

I conclude, then, that premise (1) is both unjustified and false. But I wish
to continue my appraisal of the argument, since insights can be gleaned from
what Hsiao and Sanders say on behalf of its other premises. We need not
consider premises (2) and (6), since they seem relatively innocuous. And we
can likewise grant premise (4). That leaves premises (3) and (5) to consider.

Given the wide variety of (incompatible) characterizations of the inertial
thesis in the literature, much conceptual clarity is needed in the debate. In
particular, both defenders and detractors of EIT need clarity on each of the
following: (i) the thesis’s domain of quantification, (ii) the thesis’s modal
register, (iii) the kind of ontological dependence the thesis denies of
inertially persistent entities, (iv) the factors that do or can destroy
inertially persistent entities, (v) that in virtue of which inertial
persistence obtains (if inertial persistence obtains at all), and (vi) the
thesis’s relation to temporal ontology. Surprisingly little attention in
debates concerning existential inertia has been paid to disentangling and
precisifying each of these distinct elements of the inertial thesis. That’s
what I’ll redress in the next section.

Why do I say P(F|CTST) << 1? Consider that for an object to persist for about
116 days is for it to persist approximately 10,000,000 seconds. And consider
that there are about 1044 Planck times in one second, and hence to persist for
about 116 days is to persist for about 1051 Planck times. Now, for each
(possible) Plank time in an object’s life, God is free to sustain the object
for that Planck time or refrain from so sustaining it, and this is true even
if God has sustained the object through previous Planck times. (It’s not as
though God suddenly becomes forced or compelled to continue sustaining an
object, and it’s not as though some moral obligation is newly imposed on him,
or whatever. These are unacceptable by the classical theist’s lights.) This
entails that for a given world w in which an object persists for (at least)
116 days and is then causally destroyed by something, there are about 1051
worlds in which that object ceases to exist at some point earlier than w due
to God’s withdrawal of sustenance. Moreover, under classical theism, God
remains utterly invariant across all worlds, and hence there is no difference
or variance on God’s end to which one could point in _any_ such world to
explain why **_it_** came about as opposed to some **_other_** world. Thus,
conditional on CTST, the expectation that w obtains—that is, that the single
world in which the object persists for 116 days (upon which it is finally
causally destroyed) obtains rather than any of the other 1051 worlds—is very
small. And hence the data of F, as applied to this 116-day-lived object, is
very unlikely conditional on CTST, whereas its probability is 1 conditional on
EIT. And hence EIT garners very strong evidential confirmation from F vis-à-
vis CTST. Much more can be said on this line of reasoning, but that suffices
for a brief sketch (and, hence, it suffices for the purposes of this section.)

Another purported counterexample to EIT is the laboratory-synthesized heavy
elements that exist for a very short amount of time. Isn’t it false that they
persist in existence in the absence of sustenance and destruction? Don’t they
instead simply spontaneously cease to exist?

Now, pluralists are aware of this problem—that is, the problem of stating
pluralism without employing the universal quantifier. Perhaps the act-potency
pluralist can use ( _mutatis mutandis_ ) Turner’s (2010, p. 33) way of stating
(what Merricks calls) two-ways-of-being pluralism.[29] That is, perhaps the
act-potency can state their view as follows:

Second, ONA differs from Schmid’s propositional necessity account, since the
latter aims to explain the truth of the inertial thesis in terms of the
metaphysical necessity thereof, whereas ONA posits one or more _necessarily
existent temporal concrete objects_ to explain inertial persistence. ONA is
therefore more metaphysically heavyweight (as it were) than Schmid’s account,
though also potentially more explanatory for that very reason. (More on this
below.)

In light of the various metaphysical accounts of EIT from Section 5, RPCP is
straightforwardly false. For there are _other ways_ to explain the persistence
of temporal objects that don’t invoke sustaining efficient causes of their
existence. Nothing in RPCP or what Feser says on its behalf addresses any such
accounts. There is thus no argument against EIT here.

The problem with (26), though, is that it is simply a logical truth. This is
because (26) simply says that (i) everything that a-exists either a-exists or
p-exists and (ii) everything that p-exists either a-exists or p-exists. This
is a mere logical truth. But as Merricks points out, “[e]veryone should
endorse logical truths. So everyone should endorse [(26)]. So monists should
endorse [(26)]. But monists should not endorse [act-potency] pluralism. So
[(26)] fails to state [act-potency] pluralism” (2019, p. 595).

In any case, nothing in the Thomistic proof threatens EIT. There’s a whole
host of inertialist-friendly explanations of the existence of S at t. One
needn’t adduce an extrinsic sustaining cause, contra TPCP.

Whatever you think of such an argument, would it beg the question? Not if the
speaker has independent grounds for being a reductive naturalist. Hence, in
response to such a reductive naturalist, a defender of EIT would either have
to give some argument against reductive naturalism, or show that the
conclusion does not follow from the premises. It would not be enough merely to
accuse the speaker of begging the question. But by the same token, my argument
does not beg the question _if_ I have independent grounds for being a
hylemorphist, which I do. Hence, even if Schmid had other good reasons to
reject the argument, accusing step 7 of begging the question is not a good
one. (2021)

This is just what succession means—to go from one thing to another. It’s also
just what potential means—God has the potential, here, to acquire knowledge.

There are more arguments besides, but what I’ve sketched suffices for now.
Let’s now consider arguments against EIT.

Does this account accrue a theoretical cost by ending in a primitive or
unexplained necessity? It’s not clear that it does. The proposition for which
we seek an explanation is that temporal concrete objects persist. Let this
proposition be _p_. Now, the chain of explanations of _p_ is either finite or
infinite. If it’s infinite, then it’s unclear that we actually have an
adequate explanation of _p_ , after all. If _p_ obtains in virtue of _q 1_,
and _q 1_ obtains in virtue of _q 2_, and so on _ad infinitum_ , it seems that
we have simply infinitely _deferred_ an adequate explanation of _p_. This kind
of infinite dependence regress, in many philosophers’ eyes, is vicious. So
suppose that the chain of explanations of _p_ is finite. In that case, the
chain ends in something that is _not further explained_ —that is, it ends in
something primitive.[17] In that case, though, it is surely no mark against
Schmid’s propositional necessity account that _it_ , too, ends in something
primitive, since _every_ explanation of _p_ —if the aforementioned reasoning
holds—must likewise end in something primitive.[18]

[30] To avoid expressing, by the (simple, standard) existentially quantified
sentence ‘∃x(x=x)’, that _something generically exists_ , act-potency
pluralists might be tempted to read it as ‘something a-exists or p-exists’.
But this won’t work, for the reasons articulated by Merricks (2019, pp.
600-601). In short, if ‘∃’ expresses the disjunction ‘∃a or ∃p’, then
‘~∃x(~Fx)’ expresses ‘~(∃ax(~F) or ∃px(~F))’ , which is equivalent to
‘~∃ax(~F) and ~∃px(~F)’, which in turn—given interdefinability—is equivalent
to ‘∀ax(Fx) and ∀px(Fx)’. And since ‘~∃x(~Fx)’ is equivalent to ‘∀x(Fx)’, it
would follow that ‘∀’ would express ‘∀a and ∀p’. But we have already seen that
this renders the universal quantifier _not truly universal_ , and hence we
would land right back in the problem for act-potency pluralism.

I have several responses. First, few (if any) of the metaphysical accounts of
EIT developed in Section 5 treat inertial persistence as a property or power
of substances. We saw that tendency-disposition accounts can be cast in
metaphysically lightweight terms that commit to the existence of neither a
property nor power corresponding to inertial persistence. In fact, Beaudoin’s
tendency-disposition account merely cited the _absence_ of a tendency to
expire in conjunction with the non-exercise of potentially destructive powers.
Similarly, transtemporal accounts like the Transtemporal Explanans adduced
earlier do not postulate a property or power of a substance that explains its
persistence. Instead, what explains persistence is transtemporal explanatory
(e.g., causal) connections that relate the successive phases of objects’
lives. Law-based accounts cite laws of nature, and many such accounts do not
treat laws as properties or powers of substances. Clearly neither objectual
nor propositional necessity accounts treat inertial persistence as a property
or power of substances. Finally, no-change accounts like the No-Change
Explanans adduced earlier make no appeal to properties or powers of
substances. Thus, Feser’s criticism here has no teeth against EIT.

I’ll cover a variety of metaphysical accounts of EIT in Section 5. The purpose
of the present section is simply to highlight the need for such accounts.

_Newtonian/Galilean Perdurantist Existential Inertia Thesis (NG-PEIT)_ : For
each member O of a (proper or improper) sub-set of temporal concrete objects
and for each time t such that O has some t*-temporal part earlier than t, (i)
O’s t-temporal part does not ontologically depend on the existence or activity
of some concrete object (or temporal part of some object) O* numerically
distinct from any temporal part of O, where O* is not a (proper or improper)
part of O’s t-temporal part, and (ii) if none of O’s temporal parts within the
interval [t*, t] are positively destroyed, then O’s t-temporal part exists.

the _conjunctive proposition_ that O exists at _t -1_ and that no sufficiently
destructive factors are operative explains the _proposition_ that O exists at
_t_ ; or

And I also claim that this is a clearly satisfactory explanation of this
contrastive fact. Consider that in debates surrounding the Principle of
Sufficient Reason (PSR) and various causal principles (like those adduced in
cosmological-type arguments), defenders of such principles will say something
like ‘why is it that we see a uniform, regular, intelligible reality rather
than things just chaotically popping into and out of existence uncausedly and
inexplicably? Why isn’t there chaos instead? Why doesn’t Beethoven, or a
raging tiger, or whole swathes of photons just spring into existence without
an explanation or cause? Here’s a nice explanation: these don’t happen because
such unexplained, uncaused occurrences are simply _metaphysically impossible_.
And this is just to say that the (necessary truth of the) PSR or the causal
principle (variously construed) provides a satisfying explanation of the
data.’[1]

Without generic existence, act-potency pluralists are left only with
a-existence and p-existence and their corresponding existential-like
quantifiers ∃a and ∃p.[27] Given interdefinability—that is, given that ∀axFx
iff ~(∃ax~Fx) and ∀pxFx iff ~(∃px~Fx)—act-potency pluralists are left only
with ∀a and ∀p in terms of their universal-like quantifiers; they don’t have a
fully general, universal quantifier.[28] But in that case, act-potency
pluralists cannot state that _everything_ —full stop, with perfect
generality—is thus and so. Thus, premise (19) is true.

I simply see no circularity in the following explanatory schema. For the sake
of simplicity, suppose that the relevant transtemporal explanatory relation is
_causation_ and suppose that we are considering a Newtonian or Galilean space-
time with discrete time. The explanandum is O’s existence at _t_. Schmid’s
explanans, under the aforementioned assumptions, is: (i) There is an absence
of sufficiently causally destructive factors operative on O from _t -1_ to _t_
(where _t -1_ is the time immediately prior to _t_ ), and (ii) the state
and/or existence of a temporal concrete object (or, at least, one within EIT’s
quantificational domain) at a given time at which it exists causally produces
its existence at the next moment provided that no sufficiently causally
destructive factors are operative.

On relativistic endurantist accounts, O mereologically endures just in case O
is wholly located at a specific collection of achronal surfaces intersecting
O’s path, where the specific collection is determined by which relativistic
endurantist account one chooses. (For example, Balashov (2000b; 2014) has
considered an account on which O is wholly located at all of the space-like
surfaces intersecting O’s path.) We leave open which endurantist account, if
any, is correct and so leave open which collection of achronal surfaces is
relevant. In any case, define SCong(O) to denote this collection of achronal
surfaces. Because SCong(O) occupies the same space-time region as Cong(O), we
can continue SCong(O) beyond O’s path the same way that we continued Cong(O)
beyond O’s path. Consider, then, two achronal surfaces a ∈ SCong(O) and a* ∈
SCong(O) that bound a portion of Cong(O) and are such that (i) a* << a and
(ii) O wholly exists on a*. In that case, if nothing positively destroys O
along Cong(O) between a* and a, then, according to the existential
inertialist, O also wholly exists on a. For a formal definition, we have:

Here’s my third response to the argument. Consider chemical reactions in which
two reactant species are each (individually) necessarily and essentially
colorless, but when mixed together produce a vibrant red color. Although each
individual thing within the total cause of the vibrant red color is
essentially colorless, the combination of the individual things within the
total cause nevertheless produces a vibrant red color.

Now, Feser is happy to grant that what happened prior to _t_ is _part of_ the
explanation of the water’s existence at _t_ (Feser 2021). But what is in
question is whether what happened prior to _t is by itself sufficient_ to
explain the water’s existence at _t_. And yet nothing we said above justifies
why _this is by itself sufficient_. How might we respond to this charge?

Second, pluralisms that accept generic existence render themselves vulnerable
to the most natural objection to pluralism. This objection—voiced, for
instance, in van Inwagen (2014, p. 23)—alleges that radically different
_properties_ had by things suffices to explain the vast differences between
them. No appeal to different kinds or ways of _being_ is required. But once
one accepts that _everything_ generally exists, “it really does seem like a
mistake to add that there is another way of being that is correlated with
being concrete [or being actual], and another still that is correlated with
being abstract [or being potential]” (Merricks 2019, p. 602). Why not simply
hold that these correspond to different _properties_ rather than additional
ways of _being_? “And why pick ways of being that are correlated with _those
particular differences_ among generically existing entities, as opposed to
others?” ( _ibid_ , emphasis added). In short, embracing generic existence
renders pluralism “particularly vulnerable to the objection that pluralists
posit a difference in being where there is instead but a difference in kind
among entities that exist in the same way” ( _ibid_ , pp. 602-603). This is
the second reason why act-potency pluralists should not accept generic
existence.

_Relativistic Perdurantist Existential Inertia Thesis (R-PEIT)_ : For each
member O of a (proper or improper) sub-set of temporal concrete objects and
for each achronal surface, a, such that O has some achronal part p* on a*
where a* << a, (i) p does not ontologically depend on the existence or
activity of some concrete object (or achronal part of some object) O*
numerically distinct from any achronal part of O, where O* is not a (proper or
improper) part of p, and (ii) if none of O’s achronal parts within the portion
of Cong(O) connecting a* to a are positively destroyed, then O has an achronal
part p on a.

Third, as with the appeal to microstructural elements of the chair as
purported actualizers of its existence, an appeal to microstructural elements
of the sculpture (e.g., its molecules, their bonds, the internal operations of
laws, etc.) as a ‘cause’ upon which it depends plausibly undermines any
intended inference to the classical theistic God. For once again, we’ve been
sent on a regress that need only terminate in a not-further-composed component
of something. But the God of classical theism, of course, isn’t a _part_ of
anything.

Hume famously argued that there are no relations of necessary connection
between distinct existences. That is, in instances where we have the
expectation that, given the occurrence of an F, an instance of a G will
follow, we have the expectation because our minds have formed an association
between instances of Fs and instances of Gs and not because there is any
necessity linking Fs to Gs. (Or so goes the standard interpretation of Hume
provided in undergraduate classes; addressing whether this is the correct
interpretation of Hume is beyond the scope of this post.) David Lewis
developed a metaphysical system — that we will call _Humean Supervenience_ —
according to which all that ultimately exists are (1) a collection of space-
time points and (2) an assignment of qualities to space-time points.
Everything else supervenes on the distribution of qualities. Lewis’s program
takes inspiration from Hume in that there are no necessary relations between
distinct existences, that is, between distinct space-time regions. Causation,
laws, and chance are all to be explained in terms of how the distribution of
qualities covaries between possible worlds. For example, according to the Best
System Account (BSA) of laws, although the distribution of qualities can be
_systematized_ or _summarized_ in various ways, the laws are the axioms of the
system that captures the best trade off between simplicity and generality.

Imagine we live in 500 B.C. without any knowledge of the underlying chemistry
of chemical species A, B, and C. I have gone blind recently, but you haven’t.
Before going blind, I interacted a lot with A and B and know that they are
colorless liquids. But neither you nor I have combined A and B together to see
what results. Today, though, that’s going to change. We combine A and B
together to produce C. You can see that C is a vibrant red liquid. I, of
course, cannot. You tell me it’s vibrant red. I scoff, responding with the
following:

The principal problem with this argument is that it simply does not justify
the requirement of a concurrent sustaining cause. For _even if_ S’s existence
at t is distinct from S’s essence at t, such that neither S at t nor S’s
essence at t could account for or explain S’s existence at t, it simply
doesn’t follow that the _only_ remaining option for explaining S’s existence
at t is a concurrent, sustaining cause which imparts existence to S at _t_.
But this is precisely what Feser needs for his argument to succeed.

But — perhaps more fundamentally — classical theism *is* uniquely
disadvantaged vis-a-vis non-classical views. For under classical theism,
*nothing* about God varies across *any* possible world. And hence there is
*nothing* about the cause/explanation across worlds that we can cite to
explain *differences* in the effect [ceasings to exist]. And hence classical
theism doesn’t seem to give us any probabilistic resources to expect one world
*as opposed to* any other. This contrasts with non-classical views, since
these views allow that there is something about the cause/explanation that
*does* vary across worlds, and hence they *can* cite facts about the cause to
explain *differences* in the effect [ceasings to exist] across worlds. And
hence we have probabilistic resources to ground differential expectations as
to why one world obtains rather than others.

Transtemporal accounts appeal to some kind of transtemporal relation(s) to
explain persistence. There are at least two such accounts in the literature,
found in Schmid (2021) and Mackie (1974). Let us consider each in turn,
beginning with the former.

[35] Here are two further responses. First response: The continuous processes
of change are only to the object’s _accidental_ features, and thus only
require causes that simply modify the object in various ways. But through such
accidental changes, the object’s _essential_ features remain unchanged and
intact. And, surely it is _this_ unchangingness that matters for existential
inertia, since the object persists so long as its essential properties remain
unchanged and intact! Second response: Essentially, I could _grant_ that no-
change accounts are inapplicable to objects undergoing the kind of continuous
intrinsic change specified by the objection. But this does not undermine EIT,
since EIT only applies to temporal concrete objects _or some subset thereof_.
Thus, so long as some subset of temporal concrete objects (at the foundational
layer of temporal reality, say) do not undergo the kind of continuous
intrinsic change that this objection specifies, then no-change accounts of EIT
can avoid the objection in question. Whether or not there _are_ such temporal
concrete objects is a separate question, of course. But it is significant in
its own right if we have a viable metaphysical account of inertial persistence
that applies (or would apply) to such objects.

But this response to Oppy is inadequate on multiple fronts. In order to
simplify things, let’s simply focus on the _existence_ of the chair. There are
three reasons for this simplification. First, Feser’s Aristotelian proof (and
Persistence Arguments at large) doesn’t primarily concern inherent properties
of things (like redness) or states of affairs (like the chairs’ exemplifying
redness at some time) but instead concerns the very being or existence of
substances themselves. Second, the response to Oppy raised by McNabb and
DeVito carries over to the chair’s existence itself (viz. the chair’s
existence being in some sense dependent on the microstructure of the chair’s
wood, etc.). Third, Feser himself argues that the _existence_ of (e.g.) water
is ‘actualized’ by its atomic constituents, which in turn are actualized by
the subatomic constituents, and so on (2017, pp. 26-27). So, my criticisms
don’t merely apply to McNabb and DeVito but also to Feser.

Here’s yet another seemingly legitimate candidate explanation. It seems that
the neo-classical theist (if they’re unwilling to adopt any of the above
explanations) could be well within their rights in holding that the unity of
God’s parts flows from one simple component of God. Perhaps pure perfection is
the root, the core, the fundamental aspect of God. From pure perfection flows
the purely positive great-making properties like omniscience, omnipotence,
essential moral goodness, and so on. Pure perfection is like a spring from
which flow the individual perfections or great-making properties. In this
case, we have one ‘divine part’ (in the broad, classical theistic sense) that
explains the unity of God’s parts: all the distinct properties and powers flow
from or are explained by the simple property of sheer perfection. Once again,
we have an explanation of the unity of the parts here, but nothing outside of
or external to God is explaining or causing the unity.[19]

I find the explanation proffered here both non-circular and illuminating.
There is nothing in the explanans that presupposes the prior reality or
obtaining of the explanandum. And the explanation is _illuminating_ in that it
cites facts that remove mystery as to why the explanandum obtains—the
explanandum was simply derived from the explanatory facts cited.

And nor is this explanation viciously circular. It _would_ be circular to hold
that the sodium ions cause the _existence_ of the chloride ions, and that the
chloride ions in turn cause the existence of the sodium ions. But this is
decidedly _not_ what this explanation says. Instead, this explanation says
that each causes the other _to be attracted to itself_. This mutual attraction
is perfectly intelligible and non-circular, since A’s being attracted to B
_does not presuppose_ B’s being attracted to A (and _vice versa_ ). These are
distinct states of affairs, neither of which presupposes the prior reality or
obtaining of the other. (I should add, moreover, that an explanation of the
unity of A and B in these terms is similar to one of the explanations of the
unity or combination of form and matter—in terms of conditional
potencies—adumbrated earlier.)

Moreover, whole-to-part explanation or grounding is a very (broadly)
Aristotelian notion. For Aristotle, a substance’s form “makes [its] parts what
they are and organizes them into a unified whole” (Cohoe 2017, p. 756). More
generally, Aristotelianism conceives parts of substances as in some sense less
fundamental than the substances they compose, since their identities are
intelligible only in light of the substances to which they belong. (For
instance, something’s being _your heart_ seems to presuppose _your existence_
as a whole, integrated, functionally unified substance.)

One worry thus far is that the mere fact that a given composite object
_presupposes_ the existence and combination of its parts does not entail that
it _depends_ (in some causal or metaphysical sense) on those parts. It seems
only to entail that the existence and combination of the parts is simply a
_necessary condition_ for the existence of the whole. But this only implies a
kind of logical or counterfactual dependence, not an _explanatory_ dependence.
(X logically or counterfactually depends on Y just in case had Y not existed,
X would not have existed. Explanatory dependence has much more metaphysical
‘oomph’ (as it were) and conveys a causal or non-causal (i.e., grounding)
relation between X and Y. In such cases, X’s existence and/or character is
explained or accounted for in terms of Y’s existence, character, or activity.)

[11] I use ‘successive stages of an object’s life’ as neutral between
endurantism and perdurantism.

But again, Hsiao and Sanders have merely pointed to _component parts_ (or
_component processes_ ) of things, and hence such examples do not avoid the
variety of problems articulated above. Simply re-run the points raised in
response to the sculpture example here. In particular, upon distinguishing
between the intrinsic versus extrinsic temperature, pressure, entropy, etc. as
applied to humans, we submit that we can once again see that these are
actually mere component parts and processes of humans (just as we did in the
case of the sculpture’s temperature). Hsiao and Sanders also write that
“[i]maginary beings like those in your dreams would cease to exist the moment
you cease thinking about them” (Forthcoming). But dreams and their contents
are _processes_ , not concrete objects in their own right, and hence this will
not target EIT as we articulate it.

All of this, moreover, is highly germane to the _De Ente_ argument against
EIT. As Kerr rightly points out,

Premise (7) of Feser’s Aristotelian proof states that the “existence of S at
any given moment itself presupposes the concurrent actualization of S’s
potential for existence” (2017, p. 35). This premise says that S is
concurrently causally sustained at each moment of its existence. On behalf of
premise seven, Feser (2021) writes:

To solve this, Feser argues that the line of reasoning “applies to a thing not
only _before_ it comes into being and _as_ it comes into being but _always_ ,
even _after_ it has come into being” (2017, p. 126). He continues:

Here’s how Walter Ott explains this sort of account of laws of nature:
“Contrast a ‘bottom-up’ view, which holds that the course of nature is fixed
by the properties of created beings. On this position, fire’s tendency to burn
dry wood under standard conditions is a function of the powers of the fire and
wood; to create a world in which all of the conditions are right and yet the
wood remains unsinged, God would have to create a world in which neither fire
nor wood exist. Once the relevant properties are instantiated, nature takes
the course it does simply in virtue of the kinds of things that make it up. On
this view, the properties of objects, not the will of God, play the
fundamental role. ‘Laws of nature’ will then be nothing more than convenient
ways to state relations among these properties.” (Ott 2013, pg 6)

One question for causal transtemporal accounts is: _when_ is the causing
taking place? In response, we note that this question is ambiguous between (i)
‘when is the _cause_ causing?’, and (ii) ‘when is the effect _effecting_ (i.e.
being effected or brought about)?’. The answer to the former is the
immediately prior moment, while the answer to the latter is the immediately
posterior moment. And there is no _tertium quid_ ; we need not (and, we
suggest, _should_ not) reify the ‘event’ of _the cause’s causing the effect_.
There’s just the cause and the effect, the former of which is immediately
temporally prior to the latter.

[1] There may be a sense in which focusing on the _redness_ of the chair as
opposed to its _existence_ avoids the problems we raise concerning parts and
wholes (and parts’ not being efficient causes of the very being or existence
of their wholes). For on some theories of color (e.g., some versions of color
realism), color is not _composed_ or _constituted_ by the microchemical
properties but is instead _efficiently caused_ by (or realized by, or emergent
from, or whatever) them. In response, we note that it’s true that on some
theories of color, these will be efficient rather than material causes. But,
first, Feser is fundamentally concerned not with the properties of things but
instead with the existence of things like the chair. And, indeed, this is
precisely the regress he sends us off on in his chapter: parts of coffee
‘actualizing’ the coffee’s existence. Second, if we take this line of
response, then we have brought in a deeply controversial account of the nature
of color, one present in neither Feser (2017) nor McNabb and DeVito (2020). If
a defense against Oppy’s point needs something like this highly controversial
account of color, then the Aristotelian proof loses much of its force. (And,
moreover, the detractor can simply reject the account and thus reject the
purported counterexample to Oppy). Thanks to Tyler McNabb for bringing this to
my attention.

One could try to rescue Mumford and Anjum’s account by assuming that space-
time is globally hyperbolic and then defining concurrence in terms of co-
existence on the appropriate Cauchy surfaces. But we have trouble seeing how
this will ultimately work out for another reason. The points on a Cauchy
surface are space-like related. For that reason, no signal can propagate
between numerically distinct points on a Cauchy surface. And since causes
presumably make some difference to their effects, a signal must propagate from
cause to effect. (Here, we mean ‘signal’ to be general enough that the cause,
itself, might be the signal that reaches the effect.) For the sake of
simplicity, suppose that O is a point-like particle and that t is O’s proper
time. The only entities that can transmit a signal to O are located in O’s
past light cone. Supposing that O-at-t does not cause O’s persistence at t,
whatever substance causes O to persist at t must be located in O’s past light
cone. Therefore, if the cause of O’s persistence has a location in O’s proper
time and we disregard the possibility of retrocausation, the cause of O’s
persistence must be located in O’s absolute past. This argument can be
generalized to cases where O is not a point-like object by considering O as a
collection of point-like objects.

Another supplement is in order. For while one might grant that the absence of
sustenance from without is not a candidate cause of O’s cessation, perhaps the
_event_ of the withdrawal of sustenance from without could play that role.
This will threaten the account in the same way that the consideration about
absences did. There are several ways I might supplement the account to avert
this problem. I might add that while (some) events exist, _withdrawals_ are
not among them. (Do we really want to countenance _withdrawals_ into our
ontology?) Or I might add that there are no such things as _events_. Yes,
there are objects, and such objects have, gain, and lose various
properties.[33] But are there such things as _events_ corresponding to such
havings, gains, and losses, _over and above_ the objects and properties? It’s
not obvious, and my account can be supplemented with a negative answer. There
may be other supplements besides, but that suffices for present purposes.[34]

Yesterday, throughout the entire day, there was a red chair in my room. Pick
some time t

The effect isn’t non-existence. It is the *cessation* — the *going out of
existence* — of the object in question. So, we have the event of (say) Jones
being hit by a bus [cause], and the event of Jones dying [effect]. This
doesn’t require non-existence to stand in a relation.

[T]here is nothing spooky in attributing an existential inertia to ordinary
objects. To talk about the existential inertia of an object that is enduring
is not different from talking about the ‘malleability inertia’ of a piece of
iron that is not undergoing a compressive stress: in both the cases we have
just an object that is not manifesting a certain disposition, and which on the
other hand is manifesting the complementary disposition to remain in a certain
state. With this in mind, the perturbation that makes an object pass away is
simply a stimulus of the kind that makes it display its destructive
disposition. (2018, p. 63)

Let’s summarize the argument. Act-potency pluralists cannot state that
everything is thus and so, and hence cannot state their view (since their view
requires stating that everything either a-exists or p-exists). They cannot
state that everything is thus and so because they don’t have a truly universal
quantifier. For having a truly universal quantifier would entail having the
simple, standard existential quantifier (given the interdefinability of the
universal and existential quantifiers), which in turn expresses or captures
generic existence (‘there exists’ rather than ‘there a-exists’ or ‘there
p-exists’ or ‘either there a-exists or there p-exists’). But pluralists should
reject generic existence, as we’ve seen.[30]

Likewise, you and I are dependent beings in the sense that our continued
existence depends upon a myriad of physical conditions, including temperature,
pressure, entropy, the strong nuclear forces holding our atoms together, and
the laws of physics. Additionally, we depend on biological processes such as
blood flow, breathing, cell replication, energy production, etc. in order to
exist. If these conditions or processes were removed or significantly altered,
we would cease to exist at that moment. (Forthcoming)

Once again, I don’t claim that ONA is _true_. My purpose here is to develop a
new, inertialist-friendly explanation of persistence and to situate it within
the existential inertia debate at large.

We thus have three reasons to think that act-potency pluralists should not
accept generic existence. I take it, then, that premise (18) is on solid
footing.

This post will answer all these questions and more. It’s a comprehensive guide
to existential inertia. I’ll discuss (i) common mistakes people make when
discussing existential inertia, (ii) what existential inertia is, (iii)
motivations for existential inertia, (iv) arguments against existential
inertia, and (v) resources on existential inertia. Buckle up.

Recall that we’ve left the characterization of the positive destruction of
enduring objects in relativistic space-times to this section. To positively
destroy O on achronal surface s is to actively bring about O’s cessation on s,
such that O endures through the portion of SCong(O) beginning at some achronal
surface s’ ∈ SCong(O), such that s’ << s, but does not exist on s.

From page 300 in Buckley’s 1987: “Clarke’s first three theorems demonstrate
three successive predicates about reality. There is a being that is (1)
eternal, (2) immutable and independent, and (3) self-existent or necessary.
D’Holbach concurs in these attributes, but counters that they inhere in nature
or matter. Clarke is right about his predicates; he is wrong about their
subject.” Page 301: “That matter is necessary, that is, indestructible,
becomes the ground for asserting that it is eternal.”

What is existential inertia? Is it a thesis? A phenomenon? Why would anyone
believe it? Why would anyone disbelieve it? Does it _explain_ persistence, or
merely _describe_ it? Does it render persistence inexplicable or brute?

It also seems to me — prima facie — that Aquinas allows that there may be
*instrumental* causes in the chain of sustaining causes of existence. Now, I’m
not trained in Aquinas interpretation, so we must keep this in mind. But prima
facie, this seems to be what Aquinas is getting at when he says, in his second
way, that “In the world of sense we find there is an order of efficient
causes”. And the order of causes he talks about in his ways are subordinated
per se. [Given the passage, it would be strange if Aquinas were talking about
per accidens series here. He would have to be read as abruptly shifting gears
to a per se order despite all appearances of continuing to speak about the
same order he said was manifest to the senses.] And so here we seem to have
Aquinas saying here that we *can* sense per se chains of efficient causes,
albeit ones wherein the creaturely causes are instrumental. And this is all I
need for my point to go through.

Pat Metheny… is an existing human being. He therefore is a substance that
possesses an accidental _esse_ [i.e., existence] of its own in composition
with the essence of a human, viz. rational humanity. According to the ‘causal
principle’ of Kerr and Aquinas, he must possess this proper _actus essendi_
[i.e., act of existence] either ( _a_ ) in virtue of the principles of his
nature _qua_ human being, i.e. his form and matter, or else ( _b_ ) in virtue
of receiving it from something outside of him. But his possession of being
cannot be caused by the principles of his nature, e.g. his _forma
substantialis_ [i.e., substantial form] ( _a_ ). The possession of _esse_ is
the absolutely prior condition of the possibility of the causal and
explanatory efficacy of these principles of nature. The nature must _first_
exist if it is to do or cause anything at all. _Esse_ is prior to the
substance, which means that it is prior to the composite of _forma
substantialis_ and _materia prima_ [i.e., prime matter]. But the concern here
is to understand how it is that Pat Metheny possesses existence in the first
place. It follows therefore that he must receive his existence from something
else ( _b_ ) in which there is no distinction between essence and existence.
This would be “something” which simply is, entirely in virtue of itself: _esse
tantum_ or pure being. (Nemes Forthcoming, p. 7)

Still further taxonomic questions concern the kind of _ontological dependence_
denied of inertially persistent objects. As I use it—and bearing in mind that
this is a rough approximation—x ontologically depends on y just in case there
is some extramental explanatory relation (e.g., causing, grounding, realizing)
between y (the explanans) and x (the explanandum), such that x would not exist
if x were not standing in this explanatory dependence relation to y (say,
because y ceased to exist, or because y no longer engaged in the relevant
activity, or whatever). Existential inertia debates are fundamentally
concerned with ontological dependence, i.e., x’s ontologically depending on
the concurrent or simultaneous existence or activity of y (at any moment at
which x exists), such that x would instantly cease to exist the moment the
explanatory dependence relation to y ceased to obtain. The relation, then, is
a kind of sustenance or conservation. Note, finally, that I take ontological
dependence to be a relation among _concreta_ (and/or the activities,
properties, parts, etc. of concreta).

We can now apply this to Feser’s argument. Specifically, merely from the fact
that neither prime matter nor substantial form (of themselves) can have a
tendency to persist in existence, it does not follow that their _composition_
cannot have a tendency to persist in existence—any more than the fact that
neither of the two reactant species can (of themselves) manifest redness
entails that their composition cannot manifest redness. In the case of the
chemical species, their composition can manifest redness precisely because
each component has the conditional potency to manifest—when combined with the
other—redness. Similarly, Feser’s argument neglects the fact that a form-
matter composition may be able to manifest a tendency to persist in existence
because each component has the conditional potency to, when combined with the
other component, manifest such a tendency. By illegitimately presupposing that
neither form nor matter could have such a conditional potency, Feser’s
argument fails.

_Objection_. Recall one of the central claims of my argument above: for O to
go out of existence at some arbitrary t’ (such that t’ > t) is for a change to
occur—it is for O’s potential to cease to exist to become actual. But surely
if change is the movement from potentiality to actuality, then ceasing to
exist cannot be a change—non-existence is _not_ a state of actuality. That is,
a ‘potential to cease to exist’ is impossible since ceasing to exist (or non-
being) is not some actuality to which O’s potency could point. Ceasing to
exist _simpliciter_ is not a change in the relevant respect (a potentiality
becoming actual).

The third account Kerr considers is difficult to classify, but it seems
roughly analogous to a no-change account: “a thing’s existence is simply the
fact that there is a thing of that kind in the world, and so long as no
competing causal influence comes along to alter that fact, a thing will remain
in existence” (Kerr Forthcoming). In response to this account, Kerr writes:

Assuming we quantify over temporal concreta, a third scope question arises:
what _kind_ of temporal concreta—objects, events, concrete states of affairs,
etc.—inertially persist? Beaudoin quantifies both over concrete objects and
‘the world’, while both Adler and Schmid quantify solely over concrete objects
(i.e., individuals like trees, particles, etc.). If events, concrete states of
affairs, etc. exist in addition to concrete objects, then Audi quantifies over
_them_ as well.

_Premise (18)_. Generic existence is the ordinary, humdrum existence enjoyed
by everything. (Many pluralists reject generic existence, and—as Merricks
argues—all pluralists _should_ reject it. For now, I am simply
_characterizing_ it.) ‘Generically exists’ is not shorthand for some
disjunction like: a-exists or p-exists (or exists1 or exists2 …). “To
generically exist”, writes Merricks, is “to exist, or to have being, or to be
something” (2019, p. 599). Merricks gives at least three reasons why
pluralists should not embrace generic existence. I adapt his reasons and apply
them to the present context of act-potency pluralism. Here, then, are three
reasons supporting premise (18).

Here’s another way to think about it. If F is essential to S, then all we can
infer is that it is impossible for S to lose F _while remaining in existence_.
Thus, it is impossible for Sophia, a human, to lose the feature ‘being a
living organism’ _while remaining in existence_. But this doesn’t entail that
it’s impossible for Sophia ‘lose’ this feature (in the sense that it is no
longer true that Sophia has this feature), since Sophia can ‘lose’ the feature
(in the aforementioned sense) by _going out of existence_. In such a case, it
is no longer true that ‘Sophia is a living organism’, whereas it was true
earlier. What this shows us is that all we can infer from S’s essentially
being F is that it is impossible for S to lose F _while remaining in
existence_. But applying this to existence’s being essential to S, all we can
infer here is that it is impossible for S to lose existence _while remaining
in existence_. It does not follow that it is impossible for S to lose
existence (in the sense of ‘S exists’ going from true to false), just as it
does not follow that it is impossible for Sophia to lose the feature ‘being a
living organism’ (since, again, Sophia can ‘lose’ it in the sense of going out
of existence and hence losing _all_ her properties). I conclude, then, that
premise (3) is false or, at least, unjustified.

Sixth, what if there cannot be necessarily existent concrete objects? I’m not
convinced that there couldn’t be.[26] But suppose necessarily existent
concrete objects are impossible. _A fortiori_ , the foremost view that
_denies_ EIT (viz. the view that every temporal concrete object is sustained
by a _necessarily existent_ , timeless divine cause) is false. Dialectically,
then, this is not a strategy open to the foremost detractors of EIT. Moreover,
there’s a swift modification of ONA that doesn’t commit to any necessarily
existent concrete objects: simply modify ONA to say (roughly) that
necessarily, _some_ foundational temporal concrete object _or other_ exists,
even though no _particular_ foundational object is such that _it_ necessarily
exists.

In this (obviously gerrymandered) conversation, we have a seemingly perfectly
illuminating inertialist-friendly explanation of why S exists at m once S is
in existence. The explanation tells us precisely how and why S exists at m.
And whether or not existence follows from the essence of a contingent thing is
entirely irrelevant to this point.

Existential inertia would be a property or power of the water. So, the water’s
persistence from _t_ – 1 to _t_ would, on this account, depend on this
property or power. But properties and powers depend for their reality on the
substances that possess them. So, we seem to have a situation where the
water’s persistence depends on that of a property or power which in turn
depends on the persistence of the water. (2021)

However, if Neo-Lorentzianism is true, then space and time only _appear_ , and
do not actually, satisfy Lorentz invariance, a symmetry principle central to
Special Relativity. Although Lorentz invariance _itself_ cannot be directly
experimentally or observationally verified, Lorentz invariance has motivated
highly successful work in particle physics, including the development of
quantum electrodynamics. Quantum electrodynamics has enjoyed incredible
empirical success; as one example, quantum electrodynamics predicts a
correction to the magnetic moment of the electron that has been experimentally
verified to within around one part in a trillion (Gabrielse, et al, 2019;
Hanneke, et al, 2008). Never mind precisely what Lorentz invariance or the
magnetic moment are; our point is that quantum electrodynamics makes the most
accurate prediction in the history of science. This degree of empirical
success would be very surprising if Neo-Lorentzianism turned out to be true.

There is, of course, the further question as to why no such (sufficiently)
destructive factors have been operative—why, in other words, the only power
capable of annihilating O has thus far been unexercised—but this is a separate
question from the metaphysical account of O’s persistence. And, plausibly, it
won’t be all that difficult to provide plausible stories concerning the
absence of such (sufficiently) destructive factors. Likewise, there is the
further question as to why objects lack the spontaneous annihilation tendency.
But it’s not clear why explaining this would be any more difficult than
explaining why objects have or lack _other_ tendencies. (And, to reiterate
Beaudoin, it is not a condition on adequate metaphysical accounts of EIT that
we have such further explanations ready to hand.)

Feser does consider the proposal that something might be held together
_internally_ (i.e., without the need for an external sustaining cause to unify
the thing’s parts). He considers two ways in which this might happen. First, a
thing with two parts, A and B, might have some _additional_ part, C, which
unifies them. Second, it might be an unexplained or irreducible _brute fact_
about the thing that it is made up of parts A and B. Neither suggestion,
according to Feser, will do. We can set aside the second proposal, as I’m keen
to avoid inexplicability. But on the first proposal, Feser demurs:

[13] What’s more, we need not even appeal to past states to explain present
ones. I gave a variety of metaphysical accounts of EIT in Section 5 that do
not require this.

[7] There may be a sorites paradox associated with positive destruction of
material objects. For example, if a material object goes out of existence by
losing constituent atoms, there might be no specific number of atoms that
sharply divides existing from not existing and so no particular time at which
the object goes out of existence. But, clearly, there is a time when a given
material object has not gone out of existence and a time when the object has
already gone out of existence. Therefore, instead of defining positive
destruction as taking place at a specific time, positive destruction can be
defined as having taken place somewhere in a _range_ of times. In any case, we
can ignore this complication for the purposes of this post.

From the above, I’m left to conclude that EIT not only provides an
illuminating explanation of F (just as the PSR/causal principle does with
respect to the absence of chaotic beginnings and cessations) but also gains
substantial evidential confirmation from F vis-à-vis CTST.

Posted on [July 31, 2021](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/07/31/so-
you-think-you-understand-existential-inertia/ "7:52 pm") by  [Majesty Of
Reason](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/author/majestyofreason/ "View
all posts by Majesty Of Reason")

It is worth emphasizing that this view decidedly _rejects_ there being any
brute facts concerning the moment-by-moment existence of things. There _is_ an
explanation of (inertial) persistence; it is in terms of (i) an understanding
of existential persistence as a _state of actuality_ as opposed to a dynamic
transition from non-being to being at any given moment, (ii) the very nature
of states as a kind of stasis or unchangingness (á la Feser’s account of
spatial motion), and (iii) there being (or having been) no sufficiently
destructive factors that induce deviations from the state in question (viz.
persistent existence).

[T]he existence and arrangement of the chair’s parts at any moment does not
depend on the chair itself, but on myriad other factors. … The legs and screws
themselves exist at that moment because their respective molecules exist and
are combined in certain specific ways… Then there are other factors, such as
the temperature in the room in which the chair sits being within the right
range. … At any moment at which they exist, their parts exist and are arranged
in just the right way, and that is the case only because various other factors
exist and are combined in just the right way at that moment. _Composite things
have causes…_ (2017, p. 71)

[25] This formulation seems to encapsulate the first of the famous 24
Thomistic theses: “Potency and Act so divide being that whatsoever exists
either is a Pure Act, or is necessarily composed of Potency and Act, as to its
primordial and intrinsic principles” (Lumbreras 2016, p. 6).

_Propositional_ necessity accounts explain the truth of EIT in terms of its
_necessary_ truth. Such accounts therefore adduce the necessary truth of the
_proposition_ reporting EIT as an explanation of the proposition’s truth. Why
does O (for each O within EIT’s quantificational domain) persist, according to
such accounts? Simply because (i) _it is a metaphysically necessary truth_
that, if O exists, O persists unless and until positively destroyed, and (ii)
O has not (yet) been subjected to sufficiently destructive factors.
_Objectual_ necessity accounts, by contrast, are more metaphysically
heavyweight. Such accounts explain persistence ultimately in terms of the
_necessary existence_ of one or more temporal concrete objects. Below, I will
articulate Schmid’s (2021) propositional necessity account, after which I will
develop a novel objectual account.

(As an aside: In the case at hand, God would go from knowing p to knowing the
negation of p, because he’s omniscient. I’m not saying that there are truths
God doesn’t know.)

According to Schmid’s propositional necessity account, inertial persistence is
simply “a basic, primitive, foundational feature of reality”, by which he
means that it neither analyzes into nor “obtain[s] in virtue of more
fundamental/basic facts” (2021, p. 209). By ‘necessary feature of reality’, it
is clear from context that Schmid means that _EIT itself_ —that is, the
existential inertia _thesis_ —is simply a metaphysically necessary truth.[16]
The _truth_ of EIT, then, is explained by the _metaphysical necessity_
thereof; and its metaphysical necessity is not explained in terms of any more
basic or fundamental truths.

The account above, as it stands, needs to be supplemented. For starters, it is
(so far) perfectly compatible with EIT’s being false. For suppose that O’s
persistence requires continuous sustenance from without. Now suppose that _the
absence of sustenance from without_ can cause O’s cessation. In this case, it
is _false_ that the absence of sufficiently positively destructive factors
operative is by itself sufficient for there being no cause of O’s cessation at
t, and hence the latter claim is insufficient to conjoin with the fact that
<there is no cause of O’s cessation at t, and O fails to exist at t despite
existing from [t*, t) only if there is a cause of O’s cessation at t> in order
to explain the fact that <O exists at t>. To avert this problem, I add to the
account that _absences are not causes_. By my lights, there are no such things
as absences, and hence there are no such things as absences that are also
causes.

The problem with Feser’s reasoning here is that the two suggestions Vallicella
proffers—the only two suggestions Feser considers, mind you—are _not
exhaustive_. Recall that Vallicella and Feser are here considering the
possibility of an internal explanation for the unity of a thing. But their
suggestions for an internal explanation of A’s being joined to B do not
exhaust the possibilities as to why A is joined to B. For if the cause is
internal to the composite object in question, it may be _either_ A itself,
_or_ B itself, _or_ some further part C.[20] Vallicella and Feser criticize
_only the third possibility_. That is, both Feser and Vallicella criticize an
infinitely regressive postulation of additional parts (C, D, E, F, and so on).
But this still leaves us with the possibility that either A itself or B itself
is the cause of the conjoined-ness or unity of A and B. Feser here explores
_neither_ of these possibilities.[21]

Now, as Jeffrey Brower notes, the idea that either Aquinas or Aristotle should
be interpreted as having offered a view in terms of restricted existential
quantification would be “hopelessly anachronistic” (Brower 2014, p. 54). To be
sure, Aristotle (1933) did hold that being is said in many ways (
_Metaphysics_ IV.2 and VII.1), and so Aristotle should be understood as a
pluralist. But the logical machinery of existential quantification (at least
as presently understood) did not yet exist at the time when either Aquinas or
Aristotle were writing. Nonetheless, Feser and other current friends of the
Aristotelian proof _do_ have access to the full logical machinery of
existential quantification. Furthermore, when Gottlob Frege and other
logicians invented existential quantification, they were modeling a phenomenon
that appears in natural language, that is, one and the same linguistic
phenomenon that Aquinas and Aristotle were utilizing when they discussed
being. Brower (2014, p. 51–54) provides three reasons for thinking that we
ought to interpret Aquinas and Aristotle as pluralists and that their views
can fruitfully be interpreted in terms of restricted existential
quantification. First, restricted existential quantification can help us make
sense of both Aquinas’s notion that there are modes of being and can help us
make sense of the analogy of being. Second, restricted existential
quantification can help to clarify, articulate, and answer interpretational
questions that arise about Aquinas’s notion that there are distinct modes of
being. Third, restricted existential quantification can help us interpret
Aquinas’s discussion of the ultimate categories of being, including the total
number of ways of being (Brower 2014, p. 52). (Brower counts fourteen
fundamental ways of being in Aquinas’s ontology.) We can also identify another
set of reasons that (neo-)Aristotelian or (neo-)Thomistic metaphysics should
be understood as involving pluralism—namely, that present-day attempts to
render Aristotelian metaphysics defensible have understood Aristotelian “ways
of being” explicitly in terms of restricted existential quantification (see,
e.g., McDaniel (2009; 2010a; 2010b; 2017) and Turner (2010; 2012; 2021).)

If essence-existence composites don’t have existence in virtue of what they
are, then they have it from something _ad extra_.

Perhaps you think oxygen, heat, air, and so on are present sustaining causes
of your existence, or that the fact that your computer is three feet above
ground is presently causally dependent on the table. “But,” notes J.H. Sobel,

[3] Newtonian/Galilean space-times are typically understood in what Gilmore,
Costa, and Calosi (2016, po. 102-3) call _unitist_ terms—that is, as being
composed of space-time points (i.e., points that are neither fundamentally
spatial nor temporal). Those points can be divided into equivalence classes
that correspond to space at distinct times. (The points composing a
relativistic space-time cannot be so divided.) In contrast, _separatist_
accounts of space-time include two collections of points, one of which is
fundamentally spatial and the other of which is fundamentally temporal. We
have purposely phrased our characterization of Newtonian/Galilean space-times
as neutral between unitism and separatism.

Third, consider again the causal principle underlying the argument: if x is F,
then either (a) x’s being F is caused by the principles of x’s intrinsic
nature, or (b) x’s being F is caused from without by y—that is, x’s being F is
caused by some y such that y is extrinsic to (i.e., outside of, external to,
disjoint from) x.[2] For starters, this principle—as currently stated—is
_compatible_ with x’s inertially persisting provided that x was _caused_ to
begin to exist. For if x was caused to begin to exist, then x’s existing _is_
caused from without. The cause, though, is merely an _originating_ (rather
than continuously _sustaining_ ) cause. Second, I simply reject this
principle. I think, instead, that if x is F, then x’s being F is _explained_
—either by the intrinsic nature of x, or by an extrinsic cause, _or_ by some
_non-causal_ explanation.[3] Not all explanations adduce causes, and my
explanatory version of the principle is equally well-supported by both
empirical and _a priori_ considerations as the causal version. Indeed, we saw
in Section 5 that there’s a panoply of explanations of why an inertially
persistent object (x) exists at a given non-first moment of its life (F) that
do _not_ adduce extrinsic efficient sustaining causes.

_Premise (25)_. According to this premise, if act-potency pluralists should
not accept act-potency pluralism, then we should not accept act-potency
pluralism. Once more, I think this premise is clearly true. If, by adopting a
view, one thereby _ought not_ adopt it, surely no one should adopt that view!

Importantly, Schmid’s transtemporal account does not merely _presuppose_ that
O persists from the previous time to the succeeding time; instead, the account
provides an explanatory _means_ by which such persistence obtains. O remains
in being at the succeeding time (or on, e.g., the succeeding Cauchy surface)
precisely _in virtue_ of the state and existence of O at the prior time (or
on, e.g., the prior Cauchy surface) in conjunction with the absence of
sufficiently destructive factors. The explanans _secures_ or _accounts for_
(instead of presupposing the ontologically prior reality of) the explanandum
(viz. the moment-by-moment existence of concrete objects, for non-first
moments of their lives).

One might object that neither Transtemporal Explanans nor No-change Explanans
sufficiently explains Explanandum. I have two responses. First, the present
dialectical context is one wherein _Feser_ is proffering a _positive argument_
that requires the explanatory insufficient of Transtemporal Explanans and No-
change Explanans. All I need to do, then, is point out that nothing in the
argument or what’s said on its behalf gives those who **_do_** think
Transtemporal Explanans and No-change Explanans sufficiently explain
Explanandum sufficient reason to _abandon_ their view. Second, the explanatory
facts adduced in each explanans _are_ sufficient. If by ‘sufficient
explanation’ we mean an explanation citing facts that remove mystery as to why
the explanandum obtains, then I confess that—by my lights—each explanans
removes mystery as to why and how S exists at m. The explanandum was simply
derived from the explanatory facts cited, and they illuminate precisely why S
exists at m.

Intuitively, fully fleshed out and plausible versions of mereological and
locational perdurance should be available. We can say that objects should be
identified with their space-time worms and that they are exactly located at
their paths. How to fully flesh out and render plausible either mereological
or locational endurance is not as obvious. One can render perdurance or
endurance consistent with the empirical adequacy of relativity by either (i)
replacing perdurance or endurance with appropriate relativistic analogues,
(ii) replacing relativity with an empirically equivalent theory that includes
relations of objective simultaneity, or (iii) introducing additional structure
into relativistic space-times in virtue of which one can define objective
simultaneity relations. Each of these three possibilities faces formidable
difficulties that often go underappreciated in philosophy of religion. For
example, William Lane Craig (2017, 2008, 2001b, 2001c, 1999, 1990) has
suggested replacing relativity with Neo-Lorentzianism, a theory supposedly
empirically equivalent to Special Relativity. Neo-Lorentzianism restores
three-dimensional spaces located at distinct absolute times. And if Neo-
Lorentzianism is true, the endurance of objects is no more problematic than
the endurance of objects in Galilean or Newtonian space-time.

Here’s a reply. We can distinguish between two items that are in need of
metaphysical explanation. On one hand, why there exist objects that exemplify
specific natures or essences is one item in need of metaphysical explanation.
A second is why those objects persist in existence once they already do exist.
There are two possibilities:

In order to evaluate the central motivation for NPCP from explicability, let’s
proceed through Feser’s reasons for ruling out various alternative
explanations of the unity (at any given moment) of a composite object. For
ease of exposition, I’ve broken down the reasoning (in Feser, 2017, ch. 2)
into a series of _four steps_. Let’s consider these steps in turn.

There are proposals for how non-homogeneous and non-isotropic space-time might
be sliced into some preferred collection of three-dimensional surfaces; for
example, there are some theoretical reasons for thinking that space-time
should be sliced into surfaces of Constant Mean (extrinsic) Curvature (CMC)
(Crisp 2012; Crisp 2008; Monton 2006; Pitts 2004; Saunders 2002, p. 290; Craig
2001b, p. 236; Valentini 1996, p. 60). Nevermind precisely what the CMC
slicing amounts to (though, see Lockwood 2007, pp. 118-120 for a non-technical
introduction); for our purposes, it suffices merely to note that there may be
empirical reasons for denying that our universe _can_ be sliced into CMC
surfaces.[5] (For example, Michael Lockwood (2007, p. 152) argues that insofar
as we have indirect evidence for black hole decay via Hawking radiation, we
have evidence that space-time cannot be globally sliced into CMC surfaces.)

Second, the principle <if one can ask and answer the question of why a thing
possesses a property, then one causally explain the possession of that
property> seems straightforwardly false. Suppose Stephen is hanging out with
two friends, Cameron and Joe. Suppose Stephen has 23 cookies and wants to give
each of his two friends the same whole number of cookies without any left
over. To his dismay, he finds that he can’t do this. What explains the fact
that Stephen’s desire has the property _being frustrated_? The explanation is
in terms of _mathematical constraints_ : 23 cannot be divided by 2 to yield a
whole number. Importantly, though, this is not a causal explanation. The
relevant non-divisibility of 23 isn’t _causing_ Stephen’s desire to be
frustrated. Nevertheless, it _explains_ it. And, indeed, this is the _only_
explanation of why the desire is frustrated. (We are not asking why Stephen
exists, or why his desire exists, or whatever; we are asking why the relevant
desire is frustrated _given_ that he exists, has the relevant desire, and so
on.) The principle Kerr adduces, then, is false. For we can ask and answer the
question of why Stephen’s desire possesses a property, and yet we can only
_non-causally_ explain the possession of that property.

So much, then, for premises (1) and (2). What about premise (3)? I have two
replies. First, nothing in the argument or what Kerr says on its behalf in
Kerr (Forthcoming) rules out a situation in which an essence-existence
composite has existence _neither_ in virtue of what it is _nor_ in virtue of
something _ad extra_. In such a case, the essence-existence composite in
question would not have existence _in virtue of_ or _from_ anything. Suppose,
for instance, that neo-classical theism is true. The neo-classical theistic
God’s essence, we can suppose, is not numerically identical to its existence.
The neo-classical God, then, is an essence-existence composite.[2]
Nevertheless, the neo-classical God is the necessarily existent, unlimited,
perfect, ultimate foundation of everything else. He therefore doesn’t exist or
obtain _in virtue_ of anything but is instead the uniquely unexplained
reality.[3] Everything else, by contrast, is explained ultimately by reference
to him. We therefore have a case in which it is _false_ that everything
essence-existence composite has its existence _in virtue of_ or _from_
anything. To be sure, _thomists_ would reject this view. But that’s
irrelevant. What matters is that _nothing in the argument above or what’s said
on its behalf_ gives those who _do_ hold such a view sufficient reason to
_abandon_ their position. And in that case, premise (3) is dialectically
toothless.[4]

[24] If you don’t think there is a single creaturely way of being, the
argument could equally apply to however-many-creaturely-ways-of-being-there-
are plus the divine way of being. The argument for pluralism goes through
either way, since the problem of truly universal quantification will arise
either way.

Law-based accounts represent another family of inertialist-friendly
explanations of persistence. Such accounts grant laws of nature a special role
in explaining (inertial) persistence. Philosophers have developed several
distinct accounts of laws of nature. For each account of laws of nature, we
develop an associated account of inertial persistence.

Schmid’s account seems to employ a kind of Principle of Sufficient Reason
(PSR) according to which dynamic _changes_ of state require explanation in
terms of some extrinsic cause or actualization of such a change, whereas
_maintenance_ or _non-disruption_ of a state does _not_ require an explanation
in terms of some extrinsic cause which keeps the state non-disrupted or
maintained. Instead, the maintenance or non-disruption of a state is explained
in terms of the very nature of states (stable, unchanging actual conditions
which are retained unless positively disrupted) in conjunction with there
being no such disrupting factors operative.[29]

[12] The ‘causation’ in question, moreover, can be variously understood. We
might, for instance, follow D. H. Mellor’s discussion of the causation of
stasis in Mellor (1998, ch. 9). Mellor distinguishes between _factual_ and
_particular_ causation, arguing that something’s remaining unchanged between
times _t_ and _t’_ is merely an instance of factual causation. See also Saudek
(2020, p. 92) on this point.

[9] How we spell out the metaphysics here may again come down to the
metaphysical accounts of EIT articulated earlier.

_Esse_ stands to essence as act does to potency, such that _esse_ is what
actualises essence and makes it exist. No essence would thus exist without
_esse_. Given that essence would not exist without _esse_ , why does some
existing essence have _esse_ in the first place? Even though _esse_ is
primitive and there is nothing more fundamental than _esse_ , its being
composed with some essence is not primitive; and since the essence with which
it is composed does not possess such _esse_ essentially, it possesses it from
without. ( _Ibid_ , p. 102)

Hsiao, T. & Sanders, G. (Forthcoming). The Contingency Argument in Plain
Language. _The Heythrop Journal_.

Mackie’s account raises questions concerning the _relata_ of the transtemporal
explanatory relation. The relata for Mackie are the ‘phases’ of an
object—presumably a stage or state of the object at (speaking loosely) a
single moment of its life. But transtemporal accounts need not share this part
of Mackie’s account. They can, instead, opt for other views of the relata.
Here are some options, where, for the sake of simplicity, we assume a
Newtonian or Galilean space-time and that time is discrete:

Given the above, I submit that (ii) [the claim that existence could be
uncaused in an essence-existence composite] can be rejected because insofar as
_esse_ is related to essence as act to potency, yet no essence- _esse_
composite need ever exist, there is a cause for the _esse_ that the essence
enjoys. ( _Ibid_ )

In the fourth and final step, Feser extends his arguments concerning physical
composition to _metaphysical_ composition:

[32] The cause might be indeterministic, as when (under some interpretations
of quantum mechanics) virtual particles nondeterministically arise from prior,
law-governed quantum states.

A similar question arises with respect to concrete objects’ persistence. Why
do objects, once in existence, persist in existence instead of being instantly
annihilated or annihilated at random, arbitrary points during their existence?
If one affixes a necessity operator in front of the EIT, EIT provides a simple
answer: objects persist rather than succumb to instant or random annihilation
because it is metaphysically necessary that they do so (absent causally
destructive factors). (Even if one doesn’t so affix a necessity operator,
certain metaphysical accounts (e.g., objectual and propositional necessity
accounts) themselves provide metaphysical necessity as an explanatory avenue.)
This answer, analogous to the one concerning existence _simpliciter_ , nicely
explains why objects persist rather than chaotically being annihilated: the
latter is simply metaphysically impossible.

_Premise (19)_. If act-potency pluralists do not accept generic existence,
then they cannot—by their own lights—state that everything is thus and so.
This is the parallel of Merricks’ (2019) central contention that “pluralists
can, by their own lights, make claims to the effect that everything is thus
and so if and only if they take such claims to invoke… generic existence.” (p.
606). And in that case, “they cannot, by their own lights, state claims to the
effect that everything is thus and so” ( _ibid_ , p. 608).

I think an analogy with mechanical or spatial inertia is helpful at this
point. Consider: spatial location is almost always (perhaps always)
numerically distinct from the essence of the thing occupying said location. A
cup, for instance, is distinct from a particular spatial location, since the
cup can exist _without_ being located at such a position. (This shows,
moreover, that such a spatial location is not even essential to the cup.) But
the mere fact that the cup’s particular spatial location is distinct from its
essence (and not even included in its essence as one of its essential
properties) _doesn’t entail_ that the cup’s being in this particular spatial
location (at any moment at which it is _in_ such a location) requires some
kind of continuously concurrent external causal ‘keeper’ or ‘sustainer’ of the
cup’s being in said location. Indeed, the opposite seems to be the case: we
have good reason to think that no such continuously concurrent sustenance is
required in order for the cup to simply retain its spatial position. And if
this is true of spatial location—which, again, is distinct from the essence of
objects (and isn’t even one among their essential properties)—why couldn’t it
equally be true of _existence_?

[5] Since cosmic time depends on CMC slicing, note that evidence against the
view that our universe can be globally sliced into CMC surfaces is _also_
evidence against the view that cosmic time by can be adequately defined.

The two problems articulated at the end of my recently-published _IJPR_
article, [“The fruitful death of modal collapse
arguments”](https://philpapers.org/rec/SCHTFD-5). (Note: I develop both of
these problems in much more detail in another paper currently under review.)

[6] I assume—quite innocuously, by my lights—that by ‘some’ Kerr means ‘any’.
At least, this is what he would _need_ to mean for his case to go through
(applying, as he wants it to, to _all_ essence-existence composites.)

The third and final tendency-disposition account I’ll consider is
Oderberg’s.[4] According to Oderberg, “things tend to continue to exist”
(2014, p. 349). This tendency to persist is “so basic to a thing” that it
“manifest[s] not only for as long as the thing exists but _because_ it exists”
( _ibid_ , p. 350).

Rundle, then, offers a fleshed-out, illuminating, and _prima facie_ defensible
no-change account. Objects persist without causal sustenance because (i) only
_changes_ of state require causes, (ii) mere persistence is a state
characterized by the _absence_ of change, (iii) no sufficiently destructive
causal factors have thus-far impinged on them, and (iv) the objects changes in
its relations to constant, repeated changes elsewhere. Even if one disagrees
with one or more theses here, (i) if they _were_ true, they would surely
remove mystery as to why things persist, and (ii) they are at least rationally
defensible.

Now, in Feser (2017, ch. 1), all we’re offered by way of justifying the claim
that what happened prior to t is insufficient to explain why the water exists
at t, as far as we can tell, is the following passage:

[25] Note that while the proposals of Craig and Sinclair, Mullins, Swinburne,
and co. are theistic, there is nothing _inherently_ theistic about them; they
can serve as models of N’s relation to time even if N is one of the non-
theistic options articulated earlier (e.g. one or more fundamental quantum
fields).

**_No-change Explanans_** : (i) S existed immediately before m (i.e., at m-1);
(ii) if S existed immediately before m but fails to exist at m, then S’s
cessation is (or involves, or entails) a change; (iii) nothing causally
induces S’s cessation at m-1 or m—that is, nothing destroyed S from the
immediately prior moment, m-1, through m; and (iv) a change occurs only if
some factor causally induces said change.

These difficulties can be addressed with a solution parallel to the one that
we sketched in the Newtonian/Galilean case. That is, positive destruction can
be defined as having taken place within some space-time region sandwiched
between two achronal surfaces. In any case, as with the Newtonian/Galilean
case, we can ignore this complication for the purposes of this post.

The metaphysically necessary existence of some foundational temporal concrete
object(s), such as the neo-classical theistic God or various naturalist-
friendly proposals (à la objectual necessity accounts); and

This is a fascinating response — thanks for it. Two notes. First, this accrues
the probability cost mentioned above. Second, it still wouldn’t completely
make up for the gap in expectability of the data, and hence n-EIT would still
garner *some* evidential confirmation from the data. For by your own lights,
the probability of cessation at any given moment — even in the absence of
destruction — is still non-zero, and this is all we need to get at least
*some* evidential confirmation for n-EIT vis-a-vis CTST. I will add, moreover,
that even if the relevant interruption is miraculous, God can still freely
interrupt this tendency whenever he wishes to brings things out of existence,
and he can do this at any of the infinitely many points in something’s life
[under continuous time] or the bajillions of points [under discrete time]. And
there is no difference in God across any such world wherein God
indeterministiclly causes them to cease at different points, and hence there
seems to be nothing to ground differential probability assignments as to what
we would expect to occur.

[10] For an extended treatment of issues pertaining to the continuity of time,
divine conservation, and explaining persistence, see Miller (2007). Miller
(2007, ch. 3), in particular, criticizes the ability of transtemporal causal
relations to explain persistence if time is continuous. If successful, his
arguments could be applied to the present context ( _mutatis mutandis_ ) to
show that transtemporal accounts of inertial persistence require discrete
time. Miller’s case is in some ways modeled after the arguments for the
impossibility of self-sustenance and for the impossibility of a diachronic
causal nexus found in Kvanvig and McCann (1988) and McCann and Kvanvig (1991).

[6] Schmid (2021, p. 212) makes a similar point: “EIT also explains why, in
our experience, we only see objects cease to exist when some causal factor
impinges on them in a destructive way. This is precisely what EIT predicts:
objects must continually persist in existence and can only cease to exist when
some causal factor destroys them.”

Premise (3) of the Neo-Platonic proof embodies what I will call the Neo-
Platonic Causal Principle as applied to composite objects (i.e., concrete
objects with parts):

By my lights, the standard differences between concrete objects and events
renders this latter commitment of Audi’s thesis implausible. At least in
debates concerning inertial persistence, objects are standardly pictured as
enduring continuants that persist by being wholly present at each time at
which they exist. But events are not like this.[1] Standard accounts of events
picture them as perduring occurents that _take up_ (rather than persist as
wholes throughout) time and have various parts or stages at different times
(Casati and Varzi 2020; Simons 2000; Mellor 1980). Thus, events _as such_
(standardly conceived) are not candidates for continuance or persistence over
time.[2] Similar points apply to concrete states of affairs. For this reason,
I restrict my domain of quantification solely to concrete objects.

A fourth scope question concerns whether _all_ temporal concrete objects
inertially persist or only some proper _subset_ thereof. In particular, should
the thesis only quantify over the most fundamental (i.e., basic, foundational,
ultimate, not explained in terms of some further underlying reality) temporal
concrete objects? Both Beaudoin (2007, p. 86) and Schmid (2021, fn. 6) express
the possibility of the inertial thesis quantifying solely over the fundamental
components (whatever they may be) of temporal concrete reality.

Feser’s argument, then, doesn’t support the act-potency analysis of change—at
least, not as the argument currently stands (as it entirely lacks
justification for the principle “being cannot arise from non-being” in the
sense of “it cannot be the case that <x did not exist at t-1 and then x exists
at t>”).

_Reply_. I have three replies. First, there are ways to avoid the objection at
hand. For instance, perhaps we can run the argument in terms of
_propositions_. In particular, it seems plausible that all the motivations for
Feser’s CP equally well support the following principle: whenever a
proposition P changes in its truth value, there is an explanation (for that
change) reporting either (i) that something already actual causally brings
about P’s worldly correlate (in the case of P’s changing from false to true)
or (ii) that something already actual causally removes P’s worldly correlate.
Let’s call this principle the _Propositional Causal Principle (PCP)_. PCP is
extremely similar to Feser’s CP, since PCP says that changes in propositions’
truth values require causal explanations that either bring about or remove
that to which the proposition corresponds.

At the very least, Feser’s arguments for NPCP do nothing to address such
alternative explanations. The central takeaway of this section, then, is as
follows. The detractor of classical theism—whether it be a neo-classical
theist or a non-theist—need not appeal to inexplicability or brute facts to
account for unity. There are perfectly sensible explanations that don’t adduce
sustaining efficient causes. I conclude, then, that Feser’s third premise
(i.e., NPCP) is not only unjustified but also dialectically ill-situated
(insofar as detractors of classical theism have perfectly legitimate
alternative explanations of unity).

[20] Or perhaps a combination of these. We need not consider this here, since
it is not pertinent to our criticism in the main text.

EIT also makes good sense of our ordinary, everyday explanatory reasoning as
well as our scientific reasoning. Why did the banana remain on the table (and
in existence) from yesterday to today? Because (i) it was on the table
yesterday, (ii) no one moved it off the table, and (iii) nothing came along to
destroy it. This seems like a perfectly adequate explanation, and it seems to
have as a (tacit) component that the banana persists in existence so long as
nothing destroys it. We rarely cite (or even see any need of citing)
sustaining causes of existence to explain why objects persist. EIT seems to
make the best sense of such explanatory practices. For if objects genuinely
would utterly annihilate absent existential causal sustenance, any sufficient
explanation would plausibly have to take such causal sustenance into
account—and the fact that we _seem_ to provide sufficient explanations without
adducing existential causal sustenance is defeasible evidence that we _do_ ,
in fact, provide such explanations and hence is defeasible evidence in favor
of EIT vis-à-vis CTST.

[28] Two notes. First, in this context, ‘something’s state of non-existence’
does not mean that there is an x such that x is in a state of non-existence.
Instead, it means only that there does not exist an x such that x is in a
state of existence. So, it would be more accurate to say ‘non-state of
existence’ instead of ‘state of non-existence’. For ease of exposition, I
stick with the latter. Second, I mean ‘change’ broadly construed so as to
include coming into and going out of existence.

Feser, E. (2017). _Five Proofs of the Existence of God_. San Francisco:
Ignatius Press.

A third seemingly legitimate candidate explanation is that the _kind_ of thing
in question simply _requires_ the obtaining of the explanandum. For instance,
perhaps the neo-classical theistic God’s essence simply _requires_ existence,
or perhaps unlimited perfection requires existence. And the legitimacy of this
form of explanation seems eminently plausible. Consider the really distinct
properties[18] ‘being triangular’ and ‘being trilateral’. Why are these co-
instantiated? Because they are simply the _kinds_ of properties that _require_
co-instantiation. This seems to be a perfectly legitimate explanation of their
compresence or unity in something. It does seem somewhat odd to demand some
sort of concurrent sustaining cause keeping the two properties together. And
this plausibly generalizes to a being whose parts are all the _kinds_ of
things that _require_ their unity and co-instantiation. (This is compounded
even further if there is a kind of intrinsic intelligibility to the parts’
unity together: it is no coincidence, for instance, that omnipotence,
omniscience, and moral perfection are all compresent and unified together in
the neo-classical theistic God.)

But there are no other internal principles from which such a substance might
derive such a tendency.

Crucially, though, this is not even a case of a concrete object being
sustained in existence. For this case is a _process_ of playing music and
hence is not a concrete _object_. Moreover, the removal of the violinist does
not cause the sound to cease, since the mechanical sound waves continue to
exist as compressions and rarefactions of air molecules that can be heard
after the violinist ceases to exist.

Finally, I will address the following objection to no-change accounts: No-
change accounts are inapplicable to substances that are undergoing real
(intrinsic) continuous change. If the substance is continuously intrinsically
changing, then there is no ‘state of existence’ that can persist from one
moment to later ones. Surely, the state of existence of a substance includes
all of its real features. If this state is continuously changing, something
external to the substance must then be responsible for the substance’s
persistence through such a series of distinct real states.

Thus, according to Beaudoin’s account, in order to explain O’s persistence, we
need only cite the absence of a ‘spontaneous annihilation tendency’ in
conjunction with the absence of sufficiently destructive factors operative
throughout O’s life up until the present.

On behalf of premise (5), Hsiao and Sanders point out that S’s having a non-
essential feature F presupposes that S’s nature or essence _already_ exist, in
which case F cannot be S’s existence. For then S’s existence would be both
prior and posterior to itself. As they write, one “cannot attach a case (non-
essential feature) to a phone unless the phone already exists” ( _Ibid_ ). And
from the denial that existence is either an essential or non-essential
feature, they conclude that “[e]xistence must be an activity in the same way
that change is an activity” ( _Ibid_ ).

Upon reflection, we see that the world is filled with such beings. For
example, an ice sculpture is a dependent being in the sense that its continued
existence depends on external conditions like temperature level. If the
temperature were to suddenly rise to 10,000 degrees, then the sculpture would
immediately cease to exist. Cold temperature functions as a sustaining cause
that keeps ice sculptures in existence. (Forthcoming)

One might proffer the De Ente argument as an argument against EIT. I address
this objection to EIT in both this section (Sect. 7.13) and the next (Sect.
7.14). For this section, I’ll discuss the objection’s reliance on ontological
pluralism. Then, in the next section, I’ll address what Nemes, Aquinas, and
Kerr say on behalf of the _De Ente_ argument to examine whether it refutes
EIT. [NB: I discuss the De Ente argument—including its relation to EIT—from
2:11:52 to 2:52:20 [in this
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-bJkTg_Z_hw).]

[8] Cf. Schmid and Mullins (Forthcoming) and Schmid (Forthcoming-a (my IJPR
article on modal collapse); Forthcoming-b (my EJPR article on Neo-Platonic
proof); [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0sBygsaG03c) and the
forthcoming Parts 2 and 3).

It should be clear, then, that logical dependence can be symmetric. But could
explanatory dependence be symmetric? I don’t think so. A (vicious) circle of
causal, ontological, or explanatory dependence for existence seems
metaphysically impossible. For if x causes or explains the existence of y, and
y causes or explains the existence of x, then x is both _prior_ to y (on
account of x’s causing/explaining y’s existence) and _posterior_ to y (on
account of y’s causing/explaining x’s existence), which is a contradiction.

Third, it’s not clear what this event consists in. Is it _timeless_ , given
that (under classical theism) all of God’s causal activities are timeless?
Could there be a timeless _event_ (i.e., happening or occurrence)? Setting
this aside, there is a deeper worry. For the event in question is _distinct_
from God.[5] But under classical theism, anything distinct from God is created
and sustained by God (Rogers (1996, p. 167), Bergmann and Brower (2006, p.
361), Grant (2019, ch. 1), and Kerr (2019, pp. 15 and 44)). But surely
whatever x that God creates and sustains is such that God is free to withdraw
his sustaining activity of x. So, God could withdraw his sustaining power from
the relevant event. But then there would be the event of God’s withdrawing
this sustaining power from the event of God’s withdrawing his sustaining power
of O. But then we could run the exact same reasoning _ad infinitum_. So, there
could be an infinitely descending chain of divine-withdrawal events. But that
seems absurd.

Miller, T.D. 2007. _Continuous Creation, Persistence, and Secondary Causation:
An Essay on the Metaphysics of Theism_. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Oklahoma,
available at <https://shareok.org/bitstream/handle/11244/1301/3291934.PDF>__

“The implication of your argument is that this is distinctively a problem for
*classical* theism (namely, CTST) in particular.”

Third, vicious causal/explanatory dependence for existence is metaphysically
impossible _regardless_ of whether there is something extrinsic that accounts
for the viciously intertwined things. If x causes/explains the existence of y,
and y causes/explains the existence of x, then x is both _prior_ to y (on
account of causing/explaining y’s existence) and _posterior_ to y (on account
of being caused/explained by y), which is a contradiction. But contradictions
are impossible irrespective of something extrinsic that allegedly grounds
their obtaining. This is not an argument against EIT, then; it simply imputes
to material objects an impossibility from the get-go.

Second, premise (3) is false. Premise (3) says: “Something has existential
inertia if and only if it has of itself [i.e., _intrinsically_ or
_internally_[3]] a tendency to persist in existence once it exists.” The left-
to-right side of the biconditional here says that an existential inertial
tendency intrinsic to S is a necessary condition for S’s persisting
inertially. But this is false. It is not a necessary condition for S’s
inertially persisting that there is some ‘inertial persistence tendency’
intrinsic to S. For there are whole swathes of explanations of an object’s
persistence—that is, metaphysical accounts of EIT—that do not posit such a
tendency but instead adduce facts _extrinsic_ to S at m to explain S at m.

I’m keen on reading this (for a forthcoming paper on an Avicennian argument
against EIT that I’m developing and defending). The gist of it is here on my
blog: <https://kimiyagard.wordpress.com/2020/07/06/a-sharqi-argument-against-
existential-inertia-ei/>

To be sure, there might be the further question of why some of those
explanatory facts _themselves_ obtain. For instance, there might be the
question as to why reality is so constituted that the successive stages in an
object’s life are related by causal relations. But this is a _separate
question_ from why S exists at m. And, plausibly, it won’t be all that
difficult to provide plausible stories for the former question. (Indeed, it’s
not clear why explaining it would be any more difficult than explaining why
reality is so constituted so as to have any causal relations at all (ever), or
to have causal relations other than those relating the successive stages of an
object’s life, or what have you.) Finally, to quote Beaudoin, “it is not a
condition on legitimate explanation that a deeper explanation for every
statement in the explanans always be ready to hand, or even that it exist at
all” (2007, p. 89).

[5] For instance, Pruss’ (2006) arguments for the principle of sufficient
reason certainly don’t favor the essence-existence version of the PSR over the
neo-classical-theist-friendly version, and nor do the other arguments for the
PSR of which I’m aware (e.g., those in Pruss and Rasmussen (2018, ch. 3),
Pruss (2009), and Koons and Pruss (2021)). I would argue that the same holds
true for non-theist-friendly versions of the PSR that quantify only over
_contingent_ things (thereby allowing for a non-perfect, limited, but
necessarily existent natural foundation of reality), but I won’t pursue that
here.

“1. You say that EIT is superior to CTST viz-a-viz explaining the fact that we
do not observe existential sustaining causes in the world of experience.
However, this is not correct. On Classical Theism, the power to create or to
conserve something in existence is such that no creature can possibly possess
or exercise it (a point emphasised by Aquinas.). Naturally, then, observation
of sustaining causes is metaphysically impossible *even on* CTST (since the
only candidate, God, is non-observable). Given this, I think it is false that
EIT has any explanatory superiority to CTST w.r.t the dearth of observational
evidence of sustaining causes.”

Now we can re-define EIT as the disjunction of NG-EEIT, R-EEIT, NG-PEIT and
R-PEIT.

I will justify each premise—(18), (19), (20), (21), (23), and (25)—in the
following paragraphs. The premise under consideration will be placed in
italics at the beginning of the relevant portion of my discussion.[26]

[16] In short, detractors of the Aristotelian proof **_don’t need_** to
_positively_ justify or establish that what happened prior to t _is_
sufficient to explain the water’s existence at t. They only need to point out
that the **_Aristotelian proof_** fails to justify why they **_aren’t_**
sufficient.

Debates concerning existential inertia tend to be cast in terms of
endurantism. And although endurantism and A-theory are often tied together in
such debates, there has long been reason to think that objects can endure in
Newtonian or Galilean space-time blocks by being multiply located at all the
times at which they exist (van Inwagen 1990). Moreover, both NG-EEIT and
R-EEIT make no use of tensed facts and so are consistent with both A-theory
and B-theory. But we need not artificially restrict existential inertia to
endurantism; thus, we proceed to sketch articulations of existential inertia
available to perdurantists. Again, we first formulate an inertial thesis
applicable to Newtonian or Galilean space-times. Consider the following:

One might wonder whether this account is circular. Isn’t Oderberg committed to
both (i) objects enjoy a tendency to persist _because_ they exist, and (ii)
objects exist _because_ they have a tendency to persist? More poignantly,
Oderberg takes the tendency to persist to be a kind of “property—one that
holds for as long as the object exists and precisely because it exists.” But
aren’t properties ‘ontologically parasitic’ on their bearers, in the sense
that properties are _posterior to_ and _dependent upon_ the (ontologically)
prior existence of their bearers? And if properties are posterior to the
existence of their bearers, how could such properties _explain_ their
existence? We could also frame this circularity worry diachronically. If, for
any property F, F posterior to its bearer O, then O’s continued possession of
F merely _presupposes_ O’s continued existence. But then S’s continued
possession of F cannot _explain_ O’s continued existence.

I conclude, then, that my third reply to Nemes remains forceful. My fourth and
final reply is a _Moorean_ one. The _De Ente_ argument, if successful, entails
the Big Four: DDS, timelessness, immutability, and impassibility. But even if
one cannot pinpoint precisely where an argument goes wrong, one is well within
one’s rights in denying the conclusion and inferring the disjunction of the
negations of the premises _so long as_ one has sufficiently strong independent
reasons to think the conclusion is false. But for many non-classical theists
and non-theists, this condition is met with respect to the Big Four. I myself
have developed and defended elsewhere develop a variety of formidable
challenges to classical theism from God’s changing knowledge, various
considerations pertaining to modal collapse, abstracta, and so on.[8]

Schmid’s no-change account is closely related to Rundle’s. The
account—adumbrated in Schmid (2021, fn. 19) and developed more fully in Schmid
(Forthcoming)—makes two core claims: (i) existence is a state or condition of
stasis or unchangingness, and (ii) states of stasis by their very nature
diverge to another state (or no state at all) only when positively disrupted.

The first thing to note is that Feser’s survey of explanations of the
combination of parts entirely overlooks every single metaphysical account of
EIT sketched earlier. None of those require the whole composite object at t to
explain the combination of its parts at t, and none of them require one or
more parts of the composite object at t to explain the combination of its
parts at t. And so NCPC and what Feser says on its behalf are utterly impotent
to refute or undermine EIT. For as we saw in Section 5, there are whole
swathes of legitimate, inertialist-friendly explanations of persistence—and,
_a fortiori_ , explanations of why a temporal objects parts are unified or
combined at a given non-first moment of its existence.

Fourth, the claim under consideration fails to consider the various
metaphysical accounts of EIT. Tendency-disposition accounts, for instance,
neither require nor entail that existence becomes part of something’s nature.
They only need a tendency or disposition in conjunction with certain
manifestation conditions. Similarly, no-change accounts do not require that
existence becomes part of something’s nature. They only need an understanding
of existence as a state/condition of unchangingness in conjunction with a
claim about the nature of such states/conditions. Propositional necessity
accounts say or entail nothing about existence’s becoming built into the
nature of things; all they require is a primitive commitment to the
metaphysical necessity of EIT. Objectual necessity accounts, likewise, have
nothing to do with existence’s becoming ‘built into’ natures of things.
Instead, necessary existence is (in some sense) built into one or more
foundational concrete objects, and these objects go on to continuously explain
(whether by grounding, realization, causation, or constitution) non-
foundational temporal things. Transtemporal accounts similarly have nothing to
do with existence’s becoming built into things’ natures. Rather, they say that
transtemporal explanatory relations, in conjunction with the fact that there
are no sufficiently destructive factors operative, adequately explain
persistence. And so on.

Second, the inertialist can simply reject (ii) and opt instead for the
principle that (ii*) if nothing about x’s nature requires or entails that x
exists, then there must be an explanation for why x exists. In turn, the
inertialist can modify (iii) to (iii*): if there must be an explanation for
why x exists, there must likewise be an explanation for why x persists. But
we’ve already seen several inertialist-friendly explanations of x’s
persistence that make no reference to external sustaining causes. That was the
whole purpose of Section 5. Hence (i), (ii*), and (iii*) are entirely
compatible with contingent things inertially persisting. And no headway is
made in the dispute between the non-inertialist and inertialist by simply
asserting (ii) and (iii) over and against (ii*) and (iii*). The argument
employing (ii) and (iii) against contingent things’ inertial persistence
therefore fails.

I’ll consider Oppy’s reflection on existential inertia and the criticisms
thereof from McNabb and DeVito (2020). To begin, it’s worth quoting Oppy at
length:

But as Vallicella has argued, neither of these suggestions really makes any
sense. Start with the suggestion that the parts of a thing are unified by some
further part. For instance, consider a thing composed of parts A and B. What
makes it the case that parts A and B are united in such a way that the
composite thing in question exists? The suggestion at hand is that there is
some further part, C, which accounts for A and B being united. But the problem
is that this just pushes the problem back a stage, since we now need to ask
what unites C together with A and B. If we posit yet another further part, D,
in order to account for the unity of A, B, and C, then we will merely have
pushed the problem back yet another stage. And of course the problem will just
keep recurring for each further part we posit. (2017, pp. 83-84)

On behalf of premise (3), Hsiao and Sanders write that if some feature is
essential to S, then S “could not possibly lose that feature. For example,
being a living organism is essential to a human. If it lost that feature, it
would stop being a human. So if existence is essential, then it would be
impossible for this being to go out of existence” (Forthcoming).

If (1), then essence-existence composites don’t have existence in virtue of
what they are.

More generally, it’s not clear that there _could_ be anything that exists in
virtue of what it is, i.e., anything whose essence metaphysically explains its
existence. For this thing’s essence and existence are either distinct or
identical. If they’re distinct, then its essence would have to be prior to its
existence in order to metaphysically explain it. But, plausibly, no essence
can be prior to its existence, for then it would _already exist_ —in which
case, its existence would be prior to its existence, which is absurd. By
contrast, if something’s essence and existence are identical, then we would
have something’s existence metaphysically explaining itself. For if it exists
_in virtue of_ its essence but its existence _just is_ its essence, then it
exists in virtue of its existence. Plausibly, though, this is kind of
metaphysical bootstrapping is impossible. Nothing’s existence can pull itself
up by its own metaphysical bootstraps; nothing’s existence can metaphysically
explain _why there is that very existence_ to begin with. Metaphysical
explanation, in other words, is _irreflexive_. For x to metaphysically explain
y, x must be prior to y (so as to account for why there is any such thing as y
to begin with—ever, at all).[1] Either way, then—whether x’s essence and
existence are distinct or identical—x cannot exist in virtue of what x is. Or
so it seems to me.

Really interesting post! As a Classical Theist, I’ll make a few comments in
response to the so-called theoretical virtues of EIT against CTST.

A tendency or disposition to persist in existence (à la tendency-disposition
accounts, which can be construed in metaphysically heavyweight or lightweight
ways);

To see the problem with this objection, consider an EIT-rejecting reductive
naturalist who argues as follows:

[I]t is far from obvious that the only kind of thing that could satisfactorily
explain compresence is an outside sufficient cause. … [The neo-classical
theistic] God’s tropes are dependent upon God. This suggests another
explanation for their compresence: they are compresent because they are each
grounded in God. This is not a causal explanation, but it is plausible to
think that it is an explanation nonetheless. … This conclusion can also be
supported by more general argument. It is plausible that tropes are
individuated by their bearers and so cannot exist without them. Or, similarly,
it is plausible to think that tropes cannot exist without their bearers since
they are merely ways their bearers are. (2016, pp. 408-409)

The third problem with their response is that (i) the microstructural elements
of the chair are _parts_ of the chair, but (ii) the parts of something
plausibly cannot efficiently cause (i.e., actualize the existence of) their
whole. Here are, briefly, three reasons why this is so. First, if we allow
that parts of something can efficiently causally sustain their whole, then
sustaining-cause-arguments could only get us to an unsustained, uncomposed
component that sustains wholes—not a radically transcendent God who is
decidedly _not_ a part of creation. Second, parts of wholes seem in some sense
less fundamental than the wholes of which they are parts; plausibly, they’re
only intelligible with reference to the substances they compose. Their
existence _qua_ the things they are, then, presupposes the (ontologically)
prior existence of the substance and hence cannot causally explain its
existence. It seems that your arm cannot be the efficient cause of you, since
its being _your_ arm in the first place presupposes _your existence_ as a
substance. Third, it’s a component of Thomistic-Aristotelianism that parts of
substances exist merely _virtually_ (and hence only in potency); but per the
Aristotelian causal principle, only things existing in _actuality_ can
causally actualize the existence of something else. (Cf. Feser (2014, p. 197)
for the point about parts and virtual containment.) And while our final two
points in this paragraph depend on Aristotelian views of substances, there is
still value in bringing to light incompatibility between McNabb and DeVito’s
rejoinder (on the one hand) and such Aristotelian views (on the other hand).
For not only does Feser accept such views, but they are also rationally
defensible—and to the extent that one finds them plausible, one has _pro
tanto_ reason to reject McNabb and DeVito’s rejoinder.

But perhaps their other examples of sustenance will avoid the abovementioned
objections. They write:

My goal in this section is to survey and assess the principal criticisms of
EIT in the literature (and elsewhere), beginning with alleged counterexamples
thereof.

Ingthorsson’s account of the persistence of composite material objects is
inertialist insofar as their persistence is not explained by some _non-part_
concrete object that sustains them in being. Importantly, nothing Feser or
Vallicella say constitute an objection to Ingthorsson’s causal interactionist
explanation of both the synchronic and diachronic unity of composite material
objects.

One way to see that logical dependence neither means nor entails explanatory
dependence is to consider that logical dependence can be _symmetric_ , whereas
explanatory dependence is necessarily _asymmetric_. On certain plausible views
in the philosophy of mathematics, in any world in which Socrates exists,
Socrates’ singleton set exists. Socrates therefore cannot exist without his
singleton set existing. But it is likewise the case (again, under plausible
views in philosophy of mathematics) that singleton sets exist only in worlds
wherein their members exist. It would follow that Socrates’ singleton set
cannot exist without Socrates existing (cf. Baddorf (2016, p. 410)). Hence,
there’s a logical dependence in both directions. But it’s also clear that the
set is in some sense _derivative_ of Socrates’ more fundamental existence.

This is a non-sequitur even granting everything else you said. You did not
address the points about the massive simplicity advantages gained by EIT vis-
a-vis CTST. And your four points only aimed to gain an explanatory/predictive
parity between EIT and CTST, from what I can tell. And so even if all of your
points succeeded [contrary to what I’ve argued], we have explanatory parity
but parsimony superiority, which means EIT is theoretically more virtuous than
CTST *even granting* everything you said.

Here’s a reply. What Maudlin’s account _does_ accomplish is an explanation of
the distribution of items in the mosaic. And when it comes to explaining
persistence, this is precisely what’s required. Maudlin’s primitive laws are
not further items _within_ space or time and so do not persist in time at all.
Our aim in this post is to examine alternative accounts of persistence. And
while classical theists may say that they can provide a good account of laws,
whether the classical theist’s God is required to explain _laws_ —once
conceived of as non-spatio-temporal items—is beyond the scope of this post.

In simplest terms, EIT is the claim that at least some temporal concrete
objects persist in the absence of both (i) sustenance or conservation from
without and (ii) sufficiently destructive factors that would destroy the
object(s). EIT does not aim to answer that _in virtue of which_ objects
persist; instead, it purports merely to _describe_ the _way_ they persist. EIT
can (and should) be supplemented with an answer to the aforementioned
question. Such answers represent inertialist-friendly _metaphysical accounts_
of persistence.

In any case, my to-be-articulated argument (which simply expounds on the
argument in Merricks 2019) doesn’t rest on a quantificational model of
existence criticized by pluralists like Vallicella (1983; 2014) and Miller
(1992), and nor does it rest on what Kerr (2015, p. 68) calls the Frege-
Russell-Quine view of existence. As Merricks (2019) points out, the argument
can be run _both_ in terms that employ quantifiers _and_ in terms that don’t.
For nearly every argument Merricks gives in his article, there is a
formalized, quantificational version but also a version that makes no
reference at all to quantifiers. The quantificational apparatus of first-order
logic, then, is _not_ after all essential to Merricks’s argument—we need not
assume that the quantifiers alone offer an adequate semantics of “exists.” As
Merricks writes, the concern of his argument is _metaphysical_ rather than
semantic or logical: “For the debate at the heart of this paper is not
primarily about such symbols. Rather, that debate is about whether everything
enjoys the same way of being, or instead enjoys one or another of two ways of
being, or one or another of three, etc.” (2019, p. 593). What’s more, where we
_do_ use quantifiers, our usage thereof _only_ assumes that quantification
_accurately represents_ existence. Our usage assumes _none_ of the following:
that quantification _fully_ represents existence; that quantification captures
_everything_ that needs to be captured in analyzing existence; that
quantification _explains_ similarity or difference in ways of being; that
existence is (or ought to be) _analyzed in terms of_ quantification; that
existence or being _just is_ (or _just means_ ) quantification or being the
value of a bound variable (as Quine 1948 put it) — e.g., if existence is
(primarily) a first-order property, then quantification over objects may very
well _accurately track_ just those objects that enjoy existence as a first-
order property; that existence is not a property things have (or that
existence is a second-order property); that existence is reducible to or
synonymous with instantiation; and so on. In short, even if quantification
elides important facts about existence, this is entirely compatible with
quantification _accurately representing_ existence, just as scientific
abstraction—while eliding important features of the modeled phenomena—can
nevertheless accurately represent said phenomena. (Thus, _assuming_ (as we
(and Merricks) argue we shouldn’t) that the to-be-articulated argument is
essentially tied to quantification, one way to circumvent the argument is to
affirm that quantification _doesn’t_ accurately represent existence. But,
first, the argument is still significant for those who affirm as much, since
the argument would then establish the philosophically significant
_conditional_ claim that _if_ quantification accurately represents existence,
_then_ the Aristotelian proof assumes the problematic thesis of ontological
pluralism. Second, if the proponent of the Aristotelian proof (or ontological
pluralism) wishes to take this line of response, they owe us some way to
accurately represent existence. (And if no such way is forthcoming, this is
plausibly a mark against their view vis-à-vis views that _are_ able to
accurately represent existence.) Third, it’s at least worth noting that
quantifier expressions offer a very natural way to represent the _being_ of
entities (while predicates offer a very natural way to represent the _nature_
or _character_ of entities).)

I have two replies. First, in the case of neo-classical theism, _the very
question at issue_ is whether there is some essence such that its composition
with _esse_ is primitive (i.e., not dependent on anything else). The very
question at issue, in other words, is whether there is (or can be) an essence-
existence composite (viz. the God of neo-classical theism) whose existence is
not derived from something else. It is question-begging, then, to simply
assert that _esse_ ’s being composed with some essence is not primitive.[6]
Second, even if the composition of _esse_ and essence is not primitive (i.e.,
there is some further explanation for why they are composed—including an
explanation for why they’re composed at any given moment of an object’s
existence), EIT’s falsity doesn’t follow. For—as we’ve seen time and
again—there are whole swathes of inertialist-friendly explanations of the
_esse_ of essence-existence composites (at non-first moments of their lives).

Fourth, depending on how we understand ‘principle’, premise seven is arguably
question-begging in this dialectical context. (Unfortunately, Feser does not
define or explicate the notion—indeed, it seems to be a conceptual primitive
in the Aristotelian framework). For whether there is a ‘principle’ of material
substances (namely, something that accounts for their (inertial) persistence,
however we spell this out (cf. the metaphysical accounts discussed in Section
5)) is precisely what is at issue. It is precisely the question at hand
whether form and matter are the sole principles of material substances, since
it is precisely the question at hand whether there is an additional principle
(or additional fact about reality or temporal concrete objects) which accounts
for the persistence of things. Hence, Feser’s argument seems question-begging.

**Joe** : But changes of state (i.e., cases where some new state comes to be
or some old state passes away) plausibly require some cause. It’s not as
though a raging tiger could just spring into existence in this room right now;
that would require some cause.

[27] More precisely, they might think there are other ways of being (that are
not a-existence or p-existence). They might, for instance, think there is a
divine way of being (d-existence, say) and creaturely way of being
(c-existence, say). But the sentence in the main text is fine as is, since the
main point is that act-potency pluralists are, without generic existence, left
simply with various specific existential-like quantifiers (∃a and ∃p and, as
the case may be, ∃d, ∃c, and so on).

A fifth mistake is thinking that EIT, if true, applies to _everything_ —every
event, state of affairs, property, object, and so on. But this is not true.
EIT, as I and other authors articulate it, simply says that _temporal concrete
objects **or some subset thereof** persist in the absence of external
sustenance and sufficiently destructive factors_. This only quantifies over
(i) a sub-set of (ii) temporal (iii) concrete (iv) objects.

the successive states (or ‘phases’) in the life of _O itself_ could be the
relata; and so on.[12]

I make several points in response. First, note that temperature is (something
like) mean molecular kinetic energy. In other words, it’s the average energy
content associated with the movement or jiggling of molecules. But what
molecules are we talking about? It won’t matter for the continued existence of
the sculpture if the mean molecular kinetic energy to which we’re referring is
that of molecules _wholly outside_ the sculpture. For if every single molecule
_within_ the sculpture (including the one’s on its exact boundaries) retained
a mean molecular kinetic energy with a measured value below 32 degrees
Fahrenheit, then it will persist in existence. Thus, the kinetic energy of the
molecules wholly outside the sculpture are _not_ sustaining causes here. Thus,
the kinetic energy of the molecules to which Hsiao and Sanders label as a
sustaining cause must be that of the molecules _within_ the sculpture. But in
that case, the molecules and activities to which we’ve referred are merely
_proper parts_ of the sculpture, not efficient sustaining causes of its
existence. They _constitute_ the sculpture; they don’t continuously
efficiently cause its very being.[2]

Schmid, J.C. _Existential Inertia and Classical Theistic Proofs_. Under review
at an academic publisher.

If some things go from being true to being false, then God goes from knowing
them to not knowing them.

But this amounts to simply _asserting_ that the appeal to past things is
insufficient to explain the present existence of the water; it is hardly a
_justification_ for it. The philosopher who thinks that the existence of S at
moment m is adequately explained by the conjunction of (i) S existed
immediately before m and (ii) nothing destroyed S from then through m will
simply say: “Au contraire! On my view, these **_do_** suffice to explain it.
Nothing you say in the quoted passage gives me any reason to think my
proffered explanation is inadequate. You can retort that it’s ‘no good’, but
you need to **_show_** why it’s no good. My view is _precisely_ one according
to which the conjunction of (i) and (ii) tells us not merely how the water got
here, and not merely how the water might go out of existence, but also _why
the water exists at m_. All you have done is simply asserted that the
conjunction of (i) and (ii) doesn’t tell us why/how the water exists at m.
_But that’s precisely my view_. And merely asserting a denial of my view is
not grounds for rejection of said view. And note, moreover, that the onus in
the present dialectical context is **_not_** on me to positively demonstrate
why (i) and (ii) suffice to explain S’s existence at m; rather, **_you_** are
the one giving a positive argument here, and hence **_you_** are the one who
needs to give **_me_** sufficient reason to think my view is **_false_**.”

I explained the argument in Section 6.1, but it’s also a distinct argument in
its own right. I’ll include it here so that it serves as a standalone
argument. Note that this is a brief sketch—much more can be said on its
behalf.

There are numerous problems with this step. First, even if it’s true that
_macroscopic physical objects_ clearly have such causes (in virtue of their
situatedness within a physical context wherein a host of external conditions
(like temperature, pressure, etc.) are in place; though, I’ve already shown
why this is **wrong** —cf. Sections 6.1, 7.1, 7.3.1, _inter alia_ ), it by no
means follows from this that _any composite object whatsoever_ requires an
efficient sustaining cause.

I find this to be a perfectly kosher explanation. And yet the explanation is
structurally identical to our EIT-based explanation of the aforementioned
contrastive fact. (Just replace ‘PSR/causal principle’ with ‘EIT’ and
‘chaotically ceasing _and_ beginning to exist’ with ‘chaotically ceasing to
exist’.)

On the contrary, given the distinction of essence and _esse_ in things, a
thing exists past, present, and future precisely because it has an act of
existence by which it is. It is the thing’s participation in _esse_ which
accounts for its being at any time. And, as argued above, insofar as a thing
has this act of existence distinct from its essence, there is a cause for this
act of existence without which cause the thing would not be. Consequently, at
any time that a thing exists it is being caused in its existence.
(Forthcoming)

Here’s a possible objection: just as the the classical theist objects to the
Neo-Humean that the Humean mosaic is brute and so cannot deliver an
explanation of a hierarchical series, why wouldn’t the classical theist say
that the Aristotelian account leaves unanswered why the specific collection of
essences or natures that are exemplified are exemplified in the first place?

[34] Furthermore, if the external sustainer is God (classical conceived), an
immediate problem for the proposal that there is an event of God’s withdrawal
of sustenance from O. For under classical theism, anything distinct from God
is created and sustained by God (Rogers (1996, p. 167), Bergmann and Brower
(2006, p. 361), Grant (2019, ch. 1), and Kerr (2019, pp. 15 and 44)). (And
God, after all, is surely not identical to a _withdrawal_!) But surely
whatever x that God creates and sustains is such that God is free to withdraw
his sustaining activity of x. So, God could withdraw his sustaining power from
the relevant event. But then there would be the event of God’s withdrawing
this sustaining power from the event of God’s withdrawing his sustaining power
of O. But then we could run the exact same reasoning _ad infinitum_. So, there
could be an infinitely descending chain of divine-withdrawal events. But that
seems absurd.

The Moorean argument for EIT essentially begins with the observation that the
principal ‘rival’ to EIT is classical theism. But — so the argument goes —
there are many, many reasons to think classical theism is false. Hence, since
the main rival to EIT is false, EIT follows. (That’s a super-duper rough-and-
ready sketch.)

Now consider the objective un/reality of temporal becoming. As we’ve already
noted, our formulation of EIT does not make use of tensed facts and so is
consistent with both A- and B-theory. Our formulation of EIT is probably not
compatible with C-theory, but we have difficulty understanding what ‘temporal
persistence’ could mean if C-theory were true.

This, in essence, is the same (or at least a similar) problem Schmid
(Forthcoming) argues afflicts Feser’s Aristotelian proof. Prior to O’s
existing, it cannot have any potentials, including a potential for existence.
Naturally, then, its potential for existence cannot be caused to reduce from a
state of potency to a state of actuality. But by the same token, posterior to
O’s existing, it cannot have any potentialities or actualities, including a
potentiality for or actuality of non-existence. Naturally, then, its potential
for non-existence cannot be actualized.

Whether this objection to the Neo-Humean explanation of inertial persistence
succeeds is at least unclear. While objects that occupy space-time regions are
temporal, we should not understand the space-time block as temporal; times are
explained by the space-time block and not vice versa. (Consider: _when_ is the
space-time block located?) Whether we should consider space-time points, or a
distribution assigned over space-time points, as temporal is, at least,
unclear; certainly, space-time points do not persist. Since friends of Humean
Supervenience could understand the space-time block, the space-time points
comprising the block, and/or the distribution of qualities as fundamental,
friends of Humean Supervenience can secure an explanation of the persistence
of temporal objects in terms of non-temporal or non-persistent objects. A
fortiori, if the fundamental arena turns out to be non-spatio-temporal, the
persistence of temporal objects could again be explained in terms of non-
temporal objects. Classical theists may still argue that an explanation has
not been provided for why the space-time block, space-time points, or the
distribution of qualities exist, but, in that case, the classical theist has
foregone an argument from persistence and retreated to an argument from
contingency.

This response is confused. It is irrelevant whether you can point to facts
about A and B that illuminate why they generate redness when combined. _For
**I** was the one offering a positive argument that A and B cannot generate
redness_. And my argument **_assumed_** that there **_couldn’t_** be anything
about A and B that can combinedly manifest some feature not individually found
in either. You then pointed out that my argument **_needs_** to assume this in
order to succeed, but that absolutely **_no_** reason was provided for such an
assumption. And you pointed to a case wherein precisely this ‘manifesting of a
feature not individually found in any of the constituents’ occurs in order to
bolster the _in-principle legitimacy_ of this kind of phenomenon. My argument
does nothing to rule this out in the case of A, B, and C, and yet ruling this
out is precisely what **_needs_** to be done for my argument to work. So, my
argument fails. And for the same reason, Feser’s argument fails. (The case of
A, B, and C is structurally identical to the dialectic with Feser’s PPC
argument.)

[7] Note that the proposal here is _not_ that the necessary foundational
essence-existence composite is such that its existence is caused by the
principles of its essence. The proposal, instead, is that the essence
necessarily exists and that the conjoinedness of its essence and existence is
a primitive metaphysical necessity. And as we saw earlier, there are (or can
be) principled reasons for affirming this primitive element.

3\. It seems to me that your Bayesian argument proves too much. On *any* brand
of Theism (e.g. Neo-Theism, Panentheism, even Deism, ect.), we could speak of
the probability that God might annihilate the world provided He has sufficient
power to exercise or withdraw. The implication of your argument is that this
is distinctively a problem for *classical* theism (namely, CTST) in
particular. But, if it is a problem, it is one for all theistic views and
indeed all Abrahamic religions. For on any of those views, it is possible for
God to annihilate the universe and hence open to the Bayesian argument you
propose here.

[3] While Feser and Adler solely quantify over contingent things, Audi,
Schmid, and Beaudoin leave open (in principle) quantification over necessary
things. Beaudoin holds that an object inertially persists when it continues in
being “without being sustained in existence by any external agent” (2007, p.
86), while Schmid’s EIT quantifies only over temporal concrete objects _as
such_. And Audi’s thesis, of course, is unrestricted in scope.

[7] I would argue, for instance, that Feser’s (2019, pp. 20-27) arguments for
hylemorphism—if successful—only establish that there is such a thing as prime
matter and substantial form. Feser argues, for instance, that the
determinability, changeability, particularity, diversity, and imperfection
exhibited by material substances is (or must be) explained by prime matter,
whereas the determinacy, unchangeability or permanence, universality, unity,
and perfection exhibited by material substances is (or must be) explained by
substantial form. But this is perfectly compatible with there being _other_
facts about material substances that something _else_ (i.e., something other
than prime matter and substantial form) explains. The hylemorphically-inclined
existential inertialist may very well say that one such fact is precisely
inertial persistence.

The final argument against EIT I’ll consider in this post derives from
Aquinas’s _De Ente_ Argument for God’s existence. I’ll focus in particular on
Nemes’ and Kerr’s recent formulation and defense. Nemes spells it out as
follows:

If essence-existence composites are nothing unless they participate in a cause
of their existence, then in order to _continually_ exist, they must
continually participate in a cause of their existence.

[2] Unlike Beaudoin and Benocci, Oderberg doesn’t explicitly defend
existential inertia. Nevertheless, Oderberg defends a tendency of concrete
temporal objects to persist or continue in existence, and this can quite
clearly be employed in the context of existential inertia.

EIT also explains why, in our experience, we only see objects cease to exist
when some causal factor impinges on them in a destructive way. This is
precisely what EIT predicts: objects continually persist in existence and only
cease to exist when some causal factor destroys them. On the other hand, if
objects genuinely could be instantly (or randomly) annihilated, then we have a
puzzle: why does nothing in reality behave this way? Why don’t such apparently
chaotic ceasings-to-exist pervade reality?

_Step one_ is that all composites depend on their parts. Feser writes that “a
composite is less fundamental than its parts in the sense that its existence
presupposes that its parts exist and are put together in the right way” (2017,
p. 70). Moreover, argues Feser, “a composite depends on its parts not merely
(and indeed not necessarily always) in a temporal sense, but more
fundamentally (and always) in an atemporal sense. At any particular moment, a
composite thing’s existence will presuppose that its parts exist and are put
together in the right way at that moment” (p. 70).

But this is confused. First, the passage equivocates between ‘contingent’ in
the sense of ‘possibly absent from reality’ (on the one hand) and ‘dependent
upon another’ (on the other).[23] Second, and more importantly, when one
accepts the necessary (and _independent_ ) existence of a non-purely actual
thing (like the God of neo-classical theism), one does not say that it ‘exists
by virtue of having potentialities that need to be actualized’. One is only
saying that the being in question has various potentialities to _accidentally
change_ , none of which _require_ actualization _in order_ for the being in
question to exist. Feser needs to argue that the mere fact of having
potentialities for accidental change entails that the being couldn’t exist
necessarily. But instead he has targeted the wildly different proposal that
the necessary being has potencies in _need_ of actualization in order to
exist.

Mackie (1974). _The Cement of the Universe: A Study of Causation_. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

Or consider inertialist-friendly explanations based on laws of nature or
transtemporal explanatory relations, each of which adduces facts extrinsic to
S at m to explain S at m. An explanatory appeal to the de dicto necessity of
the inertial thesis (à la propositional necessity accounts) likewise cites
facts extrinsic to S at m. And so on. Premise (3), then, is false.

The primitive metaphysical necessity of the existential inertial thesis (à la
propositional necessity accounts);

Merricks proceeds through different ways of modifying, supplementing, or
replacing (26) in order to state pluralism. But none of them, argues Merricks,
succeed. For instance, one might add to (26) the claim that something a-exists
and something p-exists. But this modification still fails to state act-potency
pluralism, since a pluralist who accepts a-exisence, p-existence, _and
another_ particular form of existence—someone we might call an act-potency-
plus pluralist—also accepts the modified thesis. Hence, someone who denies
act-potency pluralism would accept the modified thesis, in which case it fails
to state pluralism. Alternatively, one might add to (26) that there are
exactly two ways of being. But stating that there are exactly two ways of
being ultimately requires a truly universal quantification: there is _this_
way of being, that _other_ way of being, _and these are all the ways of being
there are_. Stating the latter conjunct requires a universal quantifier. The
underlying problem for any such attempt to fix or replace (26)—indeed, the
underlying problem for any attempt to state act-potency pluralism—is precisely
the failure to state truly _universal_ claims.

[5] Here is another way to think about it. Suppose that O is a point-like
particle whose life begins at time _t*_. In that case, there are two things we
need to explain: (i) O’s beginning to exist at _t*_ and (ii) O’s continuing to
exist to (say) _t_. For (i)—that is, O’s beginning to exist—whatever explains
O will not be O itself. Presumably, the explanation will be something that
brought O into existence. But we are interested here in explaining
_persistence_ , not beginning. So, let’s turn to (ii). What explains the fact
that O continues to exist to _t_? Plausibly, it could be explained by some
fact about O _at one or more times earlier than t_ (in conjunction, of course,
with a few other conditions, to wit, those adumbrated in the main text).

Note that I’m here seeking to explain a **_contrastive_** fact: why do
objects, once in existence, persist in existence _instead of_ being instantly
annihilated or annihilated at seemingly random, arbitrary points during their
existence? What explains why objects persist _rather than_ chaotically being
annihilated? We are thus contrasting two situations: one in which things
uniformly and reliably persist absent sufficiently destructive causal factors,
and another in which things annihilate at seemingly chaotic or random points
in their lives without some sufficiently destructive causal factor operative.
We claim that the necessary truth of EIT nicely explains why we see the former
rather than the latter.

[12] There are criticisms of something like existential inertia in Kvanvig and
McCann (1988). I have not considered them in this post for several reasons,
foremost among them being that I’m not convinced that they’re actually
criticisms of existential inertia _as such_. Kvanvig and McCann are explicit
that they only criticize the thesis that there is some positive ontological
item within a temporal substance—a _self-sustaining capacity_ —whose operation
ensures or explains or otherwise maintains the persistent existence of the
substance. But few if any of the metaphysical accounts of Section 5 require
positing a self-sustaining capacity of this sort, and it is certainly not
inherent to or required by EIT _as such_. (Beaudoin 2007 also addresses
Kvanvig and McCan’s points.) I have also not addressed Feser’s (2011) claim
that (at least some of) the five ways themselves represent arguments against
EIT. Here are some reasons for this. First: I have already addressed the first
way elsewhere, and in the next sub-section I’ll be considering the
Aristotelian proof’s demand for a sustaining cause. I will also address what
Feser says on behalf of the demand for sustaining causes in his essence-
existence or De Ente-esque argument (i.e., his Thomistic proof) as well as
what Feser says on behalf of the demand for sustaining causes based on
contingency (i.e., his Rationalist proof). What I say therein applies _mutatis
mutandis_ to Feser’s claim that the first three ways constitute arguments
against EIT, since Feser gives the second and third ways essence-existence and
contingency interpretations (respectively). And I don’t find the fourth or
fifth ways plausible. Second: I find Feser’s claim deeply implausible, given
that the renditions in question of the five ways have premises that—by my
lights—simply _assume_ , rather than _justify_ , the falsity of EIT.

In speaking of beings for which a concurrent cause is needed for their moment-
by-moment existence, Hsiao and Sanders write:

If existence becomes part of x’s nature, then existence becomes either an
essential or non-essential feature of x.

In order to introduce relativistic conceptions of endurance and perdurance, we
need to first place some conceptual machinery on the table. Following Gilmore
(2008), we can define a binary locational predicate ‘is weakly located at’.
For O to be weakly located at a space-time region R is for O to
spatiotemporally overlap R, that is, for R to not be completely free of O. As
Gilmore defines it, R is O’s _path_ just in case R “has a subregion in common
with all and only those regions at which the object is weakly located” (2008,
p. 1228). Or, as Calosi and Fano describe, “the path of an object is simply
the union of its exact locations” (2015, p. 287). For the perdurantist, O’s
path will turn out to be the space-time region occupied by O’s space-time
worm, whereas for the endurantist, O’s path will turn out to be the
mereological sum of all the space-time regions that O occupies throughout O’s
life.

For any point-like proper part p of O, there is a time-like curve traversed by
p. Because O is spatio-temporally extended and has at least two space-like
separated proper parts, there exists a collection of time-like curves
traversing O’s path such that each curve in the collection is the trajectory
of one point-like proper part of O. Call that collection _O’s congruence_ and
formally denote O’s congruence by Cong(O). Cong(O) is not necessarily
restricted to O’s path because Cong(O) can, in principle, be extended beyond
O’s path by continuing the trajectories of the point-like proper parts of O
under restrictions imposed by the relevant physical laws. For example, suppose
the existential inertia thesis is false and O stops existing when O is not
sustained in existence by some entity E. In that case, the path of O could be
cut prematurely short if E no longer sustains O, but we could still use
physical laws to project where O’s path would have been had E continued to
sustain O. That projected (but non-actual) path is a portion of Cong(O).

And substantial form by itself and apart from prime matter is a mere
abstraction, and thus of itself also has no tendency to persist in existence.

_Objection_. While absences cannot serve as an ‘already actual causal
actualizer’, perhaps the _event_ of God’s withdrawing his sustaining activity
can serve this role.

This problem will likely afflict any inertial thesis that references causal
destruction. To avoid controversial debates about causal relata, then,
inertial theses should generally be cast in terms of _positive destruction_
—some positive activity performed on O (either from within or from without)
that brings about O’s cessation (i.e., that makes O cease to exist). This
avoids altogether the question of whether absences can serve as causes and
also allows for uncaused but grounded destruction. Now, positive destruction
can be formulated in four ways. First, let’s define _t-temporal part_ such
that a t-temporal part is an object’s temporal part existing at time t. Then
two such ways to define positive destruction are:

The thrust of the objection I’ll be leveling here, then, is that the De Ente
argument requires _pluralism about being_ —the view that there are multiple
ways to exist. But we should reject pluralism.

This is a nice point. Let’s turn, then, to examining Feser’s argument from
change for act-potency pluralism.

Fifth, if there’s a necessarily existent temporal concrete object, doesn’t
this entail that the past is beginningless? It does not. Following Craig and
Sinclair (2009, p. 189), N may exist timelessly _sans_ the beginning of time
and temporally at and subsequent to time’s beginning; or, following Mullins
(2014, pp. 164-167) and Swinburne (1993, pp. 208-209), N may pre-exist the
beginning of _metric_ time in a non-metric, amorphous time; or N (along with
time itself) may begin to exist in all possible worlds (thereby securing both
the finitude of the past and N’s necessity); or whatever.[25]

Feser, E. (2011). Existential Inertia and the Five Ways. _American Catholic
Philosophical Quarterly_ , 85(2), 237-267.

See also Oderberg [(2014, pp.
350-353)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B7SKlRTfkUieYzIwelpBWDhUTU0/view?resourcekey=0-o2k9FXbZ3EHLAwEx1x8X6g)
on the compatibility of radioactive decay and a tendency to persist in
existence. I’ll include the important paragraphs here:

Although EIT is immune to immediate, alleged counterexamples, it remains to be
seen whether or not the principal criticisms of EIT in the literature succeed.
It is to these that I turn next.

[23] For all Feser has shown, the necessary foundation of, source of, or
explanation for contingent beings might be necessarily existent (in the sense
of not possibly absent from reality) but nevertheless dependent. (But wouldn’t
this implicate us in a regress of dependent necessary beings, which must
ultimately terminate in a first, independent necessary being? No—at least, not
if the ‘dependence’ in question is mere linear or per accidens dependence. For
Feser nowhere argues that regresses of linear or per accidens dependence must
have a first member. Rather, he only argues that _hierarchical_ or _per se_
chains of dependence must have a primary or first member. But the necessary
dependent thing in question might—for all Feser has shown, that is—be
dependent merely in a per accidens chain.) Note, though, that this first
response I’ve given to Feser’s line of reasoning isn’t my _main_ response. My
main response is my second response, which is in the main text.

What about the relativistic analogue of NG-EEIT? First, let’s define ‘<<’ such
that for achronal surfaces x and y, x << y if and only if every point in the
achronal surface x is in the past light cone of some point in y, that is, x is
in the absolute past of y. Second, note that on relativistic accounts of
endurance, the analogue of times—importantly, the times at which O wholly
exists—are a specific set of achronal surfaces; how that set of achronal
surfaces is picked out will depend on the specific account of endurance.

Another common mistake is thinking that EIT provides (or purports to provide)
an _explanation_ of persistence. This is not true. EIT merely purports to
**describe** the manner in which some temporal concreta persist. EIT leaves
open (i) whether there is an explanation for persistence and (ii) what that
explanation is (if there is one). EIT is a descriptive thesis, not an
explanatory thesis. But this doesn’t mean that EIT renders persistence (or
inertial persistence) a brute fact. For EIT can be (and **should be** )
supplemented with one or more **metaphysical accounts of EIT**. These accounts
aim to provide an inertialist-friendly explanation of persistence, i.e.,
explanations of persistence on which EIT is (or could be) true.

This is one of two general problems that any account of EIT must avoid. In
particular, any account of EIT must avoid both (i) vicious circularity (i.e.,
_presupposing_ the (prior) persistence of the concrete object(s) in question)
and (ii) _relocating_ the quest for an explanation of persistence (i.e.,
explaining the persistence of objects of type T by implicitly or explicitly
assuming the persistence of objects of type T*). We will see throughout many
of the following subsections how the various accounts circumvent such worries.
For now, let’s consider how Oderberg replies to the circularity worry.

“That doesn’t really amount to much of an objection. In the case of wine,
there are facts we can point to that explain exactly _why_ they will together
generate something with a distinctively wine-like flavor. But you do not tell
us _exactly what it is_ about A and B that would (or indeed _could_ ), when
they are combined, generate this vibrant red color.”

I also want to cover something Feser fails adequately to rule out (and which
would need to be ruled out for his argument to succeed): why couldn’t the
unity of something’s parts have an _internal_ cause for their combination or
‘holding together’ as opposed to an _external_ sustaining cause?

Another reason to think dependent beings require a continual explanation
distinct from themselves is that existence is not built into their nature. For
example, there is nothing in the nature of what it is to be a dinosaur that
requires it to exist. It is possible for dinosaurs to exist or not to exist.
Their existence is neither impossible nor required. Because of this, the
“default state” of a dinosaur’s nature is non-existence. (Forthcoming)

_Classical Theistic Sustenance Thesis (CTST)_ : All temporal concrete objects
(would) immediately annihilate absent sustenance or conservation from without,
such that a necessary condition for their persistence is the moment-by-moment
sustaining or conserving activity of a timeless God.

But the exact same motivation for demanding an extrinsic cause of the unity of
composite objects seems equally to apply to the multiplicity of divine persons
unified in a single Godhead. In other words, there seems to be no
justification for NPCP that doesn’t also justify demanding a cause of any
Trinitarian being. There seems to be no non-question-begging, non-arbitrary,
principled way to delineate the demand for an extrinsic cause of unity in the
case of things that are composites of (say) distinct attributes, or of essence
and accident, or what have you (on the one hand) and things within which there
is a multiplicity of distinct persons and processions (on the other hand).

**Fourth** , please cite this post if you will be using its content in any
way. Fair use rules apply to the whole post. 🙂

[15] If time is continuous, we can let the temporal state immediately prior to
t refer to some suitably small finite interval of time—perhaps infinitesimally
small—with t as its later-than bound.

This response, however, doesn’t work. For, as we saw in my second reply to
premise (3), Kerr’s argument aiming to establish a cause for this act of
existence _assumes_ that no metaphysical account of EIT succeeds. Kerr cannot
then _use_ this argument to _dismiss_ one such metaphysical account. What’s
more, the inertialist could equally argue as follows: “On the contrary, even
if essence and _esse_ are distinct in x, x _enjoys_ an act of existence at a
given non-first moment m of x’s life _precisely because_ (i) a transtemporal
explanatory relation obtains between x-before-m and x-at-m and (ii) no
sufficiently destructive factors operate in the interim.” To be sure, this
provides Kerr no reason to abandon Kerr’s position; but, of course, the same
is true of Kerr’s response to the transtemporal account in question—it
provides inertialists who accept it no reason to abandon their position.

Nemes is here expressing a causal principle found in Aquinas, which Kerr
(2015, p. 93) translates as follows:

I actually have a footnote in my book manuscript under review addressing
precisely this objection. [I call it the ‘incommunicability thesis’.] Here’s
what I say:

Third, a simpler statement of EIT. The thesis is simply that one or more
temporal concrete objects persist in existence in the absence of both (i)
concurrent sustenance or conservation from without and (ii) factors sufficient
to positively destroy the object(s).

But perhaps someone will argue that, per the Principle of Sufficient Reason
(PSR), the present existence of the water (or any substance for that matter)
requires an explanation. And absent a concurrently operative existential
sustaining cause, there is no explanation for the present existence of the
water. Call this response the ‘PSR Response’

1\. You say that EIT is superior to CTST viz-a-viz explaining the fact that we
do not observe existential sustaining causes in the world of experience.
However, this is not correct. On Classical Theism, the power to create or to
conserve something in existence is such that no creature can possibly possess
or exercise it (a point emphasised by Aquinas.). Naturally, then, observation
of sustaining causes is metaphysically impossible *even on* CTST (since the
only candidate, God, is non-observable). Given this, I think it is false that
EIT has any explanatory superiority to CTST w.r.t the dearth of observational
evidence of sustaining causes.

“But,” one may object, “surely that is the very question at issue—namely,
whether conditional potencies, once actualized, remain in a state of actuality
with respect to one another.” This is true. But this shows that we cannot (in
a non-question-begging manner) assume from the get-go an answer _either way_.
In particular, we would beg the question if we assumed from the get-go that
conditional potencies, once actualized, do _not_ remain in a state of
actuality. But such a presupposition is precisely what Feser needs for his
form-matter interdependence argument to succeed. For if form and matter
interdepend but also (individually) have the conditional potency to persist in
existence once combined, and if conditional potencies, once actualized, remain
in a state of actuality, then it is simply false that vicious circularity
ensues in our explanation of the present existence of some substance. This is
because the explanation of the present existence of a substance would not be
in terms of form’s dependence on matter and matter’s corresponding dependence
on form. Rather, the explanation would be in terms of (i) the cause of the
origination into existence of the substance (and thereby the composition of
the matter and form), (ii) the actualization of the requisite conditional
potency within form and matter, (iii) the nature of conditional potencies
(namely, to remain in a state of actuality once actualized[9]), and (iv) there
being no sufficiently destructive causal factors operative.

[2] As Ingthorsson (2021, ch. 6) points out, it’s well-nigh standard/universal
in contemporary philosophy of causation and mereology to hold that the
constitution relation is not an efficient causal relation. Note, also, that I
gave some Aristotelian-inspired reasons for this position earlier.

Moreover, if absences can serve as causes, then Schmid’s EIT is perfectly
compatible with every temporal concrete object being continuously sustained in
existence (even though—ex hypothesi—they do not _require_ sustenance in order
to persist). For if absences can serve as causes, then the absence or
withdrawal of (say) divine timeless conservation of O (for any O within EIT’s
scope) might plausibly be a _cause_ of O’s ceasing to exist, such that any
actual withdrawal of such conserving activity causes the cessation of O. But
in such a scenario, both (i) and (ii) of Schmid’s EIT are satisfied: (i) O
persists without _requiring_ sustenance (though it is _in fact_ continuously
sustained), and (ii) O ceases only if caused to cease (by a withdrawal of
God’s sustaining activity, say). Thus, assuming that absences can serve as
causes, Schmid’s EIT renders the following conjunction possible: (i) nothing
inertially persists (i.e., every temporal concrete object is continuously
conserved or sustained in being), and yet (ii) EIT is true. This seems
implausible. By my lights, the truth of an inertial thesis should secure the
_actual_ inertial persistence of at least some temporal concrete objects.

At best, then, this is a case of a _continually perpetuating_ , rather than
sustaining, cause—a cause such that its instantaneous removal (i) does not
necessitate the instantaneous removal of the effect but (ii) contributes to
the removal of the effect after a (sometimes short) duration of time.

Now, neither Transtemporal Explanans nor No-change Explanans cite facts that
explain Explanandum (S’s existence at m) that are intrinsic to Explanandum
(i.e., that are intrinsic to S at m or S’s existence at m). And yet both
scenarios are ones in which S inertially persists. And hence something can
inertially persist (i.e., persist in the absence of both destruction and
continuously and concurrently operative sustenance from without) _without_
this inertial persistence deriving from (resulting from, being explained by)
some intrinsic principle or tendency. Instead, for each non-first moment m of
S’s life, the explanation of S at m is extrinsic to S at m but not a
concurrently operative extrinsic sustaining efficient cause.[6] Thus, premise
(3) is false.

1 Common mistakes  
2 The basics of existential inertia  
3 Clarifying the Existential Inertia Thesis (EIT)  
—–3.1 Scope  
—–3.2 Persistence and Relativity Theory*  
—–3.3 Modal Register  
—–3.4 Dependence and Destruction  
—–3.5 Metaphysical Accounts  
4 A rigorous articulation of EIT*  
—–4.1 Temporal Ontology*  
—–4.2 Taxonomic questions: Summary  
5 The metaphysics of EIT  
—–5.1 Tendency-disposition Accounts  
—–5.2 Transtemporal Accounts  
—–5.3 Law-based Accounts*  
—–5.4 Necessity Accounts  
—–5.5 No-change Accounts  
6 Motivating EIT  
—–6.1 Theoretical Virtues  
—–6.2 Aristotelian proof argument  
—–6.3 Divine Temporality  
—–6.4 Bayesian argument  
—–6.5 Moorean argument  
7 Arguments against EIT  
—–7.1 Alleged Counterexamples  
—–7.2 Red Chairs  
—–7.3 Hsiao and Sanders  
———-7.3.1 Counterexamples to EIT  
———-7.3.2 First Metaphysical Argument  
———-7.3.4 Third Metaphysical Argument  
—–7.4 Proportionate Causality  
—–7.5 Form-matter Interdependence  
—–7.6 Contingent Natures  
—–7.7 Vicious Circularity  
—–7.8 Aristotelian proof causal principle  
—–7.9 Neo-Platonic proof causal principle  
—–7.10 Thomistic proof causal principle  
—–7.11 Rationalist proof causal principle  
—–7.12 Nemes’ argument  
—–7.13 De Ente argument and ontological pluralism  
—–7.14 Nemes and Kerr on the _De Ente_ argument  
8 Resources  
—–8.1 Articles  
—–8.2 YouTube videos  
—–8.3 Blog posts

Having defended Schmid’s propositional necessity account, I now develop a new,
objectual necessity account:

For Feser’s circularity objection to work, the explanatory facts in each
explanans must presuppose the (explanatorily or ontologically) prior obtaining
of Explanandum. But that is simply untrue. I think it is clear from inspection
that neither Transtemporal Explanans nor No-change Explanans presuppose the
prior reality or obtaining of Explanandum. In other words, none of the
explanatory facts are dependent upon S’s existence at m. And in that case,
Feser’s allegation of viciously circular (explanatory) dependence has no teeth
against such explanans. It is simply false, of both explanans, that there is
some property or power that both _explains_ and is explained _by_ some fact.
And the other metaphysical accounts likewise do not fall prey to charges of
vicious circularity.

According to friends of Humean Supervenience, what explains the persistence of
objects? Ordinary objects supervene on the distribution of qualities on the
fundamental arena. Consequently, what explains the persistence of objects is
just the fact that a specific pattern of qualities obtains on the fundamental
arena. Consider that, for friends of Humean Supervenience, the truth
conditions for modal claims — and so the truth conditions for counterfactuals
— are provided in terms of how the distribution of qualities covaries from the
actual world to nearby worlds. So, why does an object persist from one time to
another or from one Cauchy surface to another or whatever?

If there is succession in God’s life [and, moreover, if God has potential that
becomes actual], then God is temporal.

[5] Two notes. First: For simplicity, we here assume that time is composed of
smallest units termed _moments_. Nothing much hangs on this, though; we could
explicate each explanans in a continuous-time-friendly manner _mutatis
mutandis_. Our more general point remains unaffected. Second: These are not
the _only_ explanantia under no-change and transtemporal accounts. We choose
only _one_ explanans from each of these two accounts for ease of exposition.

Oderberg’s response, though, might seem unsatisfying. For while neither the
mere existence nor mere continued existence of O explains O’s tendency to
continue to exist, Oderberg seems to _grant_ that O’s existence is _prior_ to
O’s tendency. (For instance, Oderberg says O cannot have the tendency without
existing _in the first place_.) And this is surely all we need to get the
circularity worry up and running. For if O’s tendency to persist presupposes
O’s existence, then surely the continued _possession_ and _manifestation_ of
said tendency likewise presupposes O’s continued existence. And in that case,
the tendency cannot _explain_ or _account for_ O’s continued existence.
Consider: even though my having a phone (plausibly) doesn’t explain why I
received a call from my friend today, it is nevertheless _prior to_ and
_presupposed by_ the latter. And in that case, the latter cannot _explain why_
the former obtains.

But this confuses _de re_ necessity with _de dicto_ necessity. If F is
essential to S, this only means ( _inter alia_ ) that S cannot exist without
being F. Importantly, it does _not_ mean that necessarily, S is F. The former
kind of necessity is de re necessity. The latter kind of necessity is de dicto
necessity.

Second, the appeal to parts will not target EIT as I’ve articulated it. For my
EIT only debars inertially persistent objects from dependence on _non-parts_
of them. Thus, my EIT already takes into account any dependence something
might have on its parts, _even if_ the relevant parts in question are
efficient sustaining causes.

First, the inference to the claim that “there must at _t_ be something
distinct from the collection which actualizes its potential to be _water_ ,
specifically” is a non-sequitur. Merely from the facts that the collection _as
such_ ( _qua_ collection) does not suffice for the collection’s actually
constituting water at t, the only thing that follows is that there must be
some _other_ sufficient condition(s) for the collection’s constituting water
at t. What _doesn’t_ follow is that this other sufficient condition(s) is an
_external sustaining, efficient, actualizing cause_. The other sufficient
condition(s) need only be some _explanation_ of why the collection constitutes
water at t. But there are whole swathes of explanations of why the collection
constitutes water at t that don’t adduce some outside sustaining or conserving
efficient cause. I have already explored these in detail in Section 5. Here’s
a reminder and quick-and-dirty summary:

What’s more, EIT seems to provide the best explanation for why we don’t
observe sustaining causes in the world around us—or if we do, why they are so
rare. Consider your present existence. Do you have a sustaining efficient
cause?

I have one note and two responses. The note is that in appraising Kerr’s case,
I will grant the legitimacy of constituent ontology, realism about essences,
realism about existence, and so on. Now let’s consider my three responses.

Once brought into existence, O could only _cease_ to be in state S if either
(i) some cause C positively brings O out of S, (ii) whatever is preventing or
inhibiting C ceases its preventative activity, or (iii) the maintenance of S
involves continuous changes but the causal source of such changes ceases its
activity. But no such cause as C acted to bring O out of existence from _t*_
to _t_ ; and no such cause as C was ‘waiting in the wings’, as it were, for
some preventative force to cease its prevention and allow C to destroy O; and,
finally, the mere maintenance of the state of _existence_ does not involve
continuous changes. Hence, none of (i)-(iii) are met—in which case, it follows
by modus tollens that _O will not cease to exist_.

Where _t -1_ is the time immediately prior to _t_ and where _t_ is a non-first
time at which O exists: the _event_ of O’s existing at _t -1_ causes—in the
absence of (sufficiently) destructive factors—the _event_ of O’s existing at
_t_ ; or

Yet another motivation for EIT derives from divine temporality. For if God is
temporal, then there is at least one temporal concrete object that persists in
existence without sustenance or conservation from without. I don’t have space
here for a full defense or justification of EIT. I simply note that the
various arguments in favor of divine temporality are _ipso facto_ arguments
for EIT (cf. Mullins 2016).[6] I will, though, sketch an argument for divine
temporality. I’ve developed this argument at length and responded to
objections elsewhere.

Second, even if successful (it’s not), the reasoning here would only justify
the claim that **contingent** objects require a sustaining cause. For the
reasoning hinges on the idea that the particles could compose something else
(i.e., that they need not constitute S) at t, and hence that there must be
some cause that explains why they constitute S at t. But this is simply
inapplicable to necessary beings, since their parts (if they have them) don’t
have the potential to compose something else. And recall that EIT only
quantifies over temporal concrete objects **or some sub-set thereof** , and
hence it is compatible with every contingent thing require a sustaining cause
(so long as the necessary concrete object(s) upon which they depend inertially
persist).

To make things concrete, suppose coffee goes from warm (at t-1) to cold (at
t). Then, on Feser’s own analysis, at t-1 the relevant actual being (the
_actual coldness_ of the coffee) did not exist (i.e., was not real or in
reality). Then, at a later time t, it exists. Feser, then, is equally
committed to denying the principle that “it cannot be the case that <x did not
exist at t-1 and then x exists at t>.” And so Feser has to grant the very
thing that is allegedly problematic on my analysis. What this tells us, I
think, is that it simply isn’t problematic at all.

[29] As Merricks (2019, p. 594) points out, several authors seem to agree that
Turner’s approach (or something exactly like it in relevant respects) is the
pluralist’s best hope for stating their view. See, e.g., Loux (2012) and van
Inwagen (2014).

[T]he Thomist will still ask about the _esse_ of the thing, and given the
reasoning found throughout Aquinas’s work on the distinction between essence
and _esse_ , no essential component of a composite of essence and _esse_ can
account for the _esse_ of the thing. Hence a composite of essence and _esse_
is dependent and thereby caused in its _esse_ without which cause it would be
nothing. (Forthcoming)

The second problem with their response is that appealing to microstructure as
a ‘cause’ upon which a chair depends simply undermines their ultimate intended
inference to an unsustained sustainer of the existence of everything apart
from itself. For the microstructure of the chair is a _component_ of the
chair, and only ‘actualizes’ the chair in the sense that something ‘depends’
(in some sense) on its components. But upon tracing _this_ causal chain of
‘dependence’ down to a first member, all we’re entitled to infer about such a
member is that it is an _uncomposed component_ , not an unactualized
actualizer of the very being or existence of the things in question. McNabb
and DeVito have not pointed to something _outside_ the composite object as an
actualizer of its very being; instead, they’ve merely sent us off on a regress
of more fundamental component _parts_ of something on which that thing
‘depends’ (in the sense of whole-to-part dependence). Their response, then,
ends up doing more harm than good.[1]

Here’s my second reply to Feser’s response to the charge of question-begging.
Even if Feser has independent reasons for the thesis that material substances
are compounds of substantial form and prime matter, what matters is whether
Feser has independent reasons for the thesis that material substances are
compounds _only_ of substantial form and prime matter. Many of the arguments
for hylemorphism—if successful—only establish that material substances are
composed of substantial form and prime matter.[7] But it is an entirely
separate question whether these are the _only_ principles of material
substances.

It is not part of [EIT] to suggest that the continuance of things is a brute
fact. It is explained by reference to the facts (i) that the only power
capable of annihilating the world’s fundamental material has so far gone
unexercised, and (ii) that this material has no inherent tendency to just
spontaneously disappear… Here again the analogy with mechanical inertia is
illustrative: the continued uniform motion of a body through space is not to
the physicist a mere surd. It is the outcome of the absence of any unbalanced
force applied to the object, combined with its natural tendency to keep moving
unless such a force is encountered. Of course, one may ask why the motion or
existence of any object is characterized by inertia, and the inertialist in
either context may or may not be able to provide an answer… But even if the
existential inertialist cannot identify any deeper metaphysical basis for this
form of inertia, this in no way invalidates [EIT] as an explanation of the
world’s continuance; it is not a condition on legitimate explanation that a
deeper explanation for every statement in the explanans always be ready to
hand, or even that it exist at all. The inertialist may well run into a brute
fact somewhere in his accounting for the world’s continuance, but it is far
from clear that the proponent of DDC [the Doctrine of Divine Conservation]
will fare better in this regard. (2007, pp. 88-89)

_Premise (21)_. This premise says that if one cannot _state_ a view, one
should not _accept_ that view. Like (20), I take this to be clearly true.

Schmid, J.C. (2021). Existential inertia and the Aristotelian proof.
_International Journal for Philosophy of Religion_ , 89: 201-220.

the _state of affairs_ involving O’s existing at _t -1_ causes—in the absence
of (sufficiently) destructive factors—the _state of affairs_ involving O’s
existing at _t_ ; or

In essence, NG-PEIT states that an object perdures at non-first times of O’s
temporally extended life without ontological dependence on concrete non-parts
of O _so long as_ nothing positively destroys O’s temporal parts (which,
recall, means that nothing actively prevents O from having such parts).
Likewise, we can formulate an inertial thesis for perduring objects in
relativistic space-times:

[1] Pruss and Rasmussen (2018), for instance, offer an argument along these
lines for one of their principles.

But absences are not actual things—they are precisely the _absence_ or _non-
existence_ of actual things. _A fortiori_ , an absence of sustenance or
conservation from without is not an actual thing. Hence, an absence of
sustenance from without cannot causally actualize O’s going out of existence
at t’, precisely because only something _already actual_ can causally
actualize potentials (per CP), whereas absences are _not actual_.

Moreover, we have seen that there exist _alternative explanations_ of S’s
existence at t that decidedly reject efficient sustaining causes. For
instance, S’s existence at t could easily be explained (for all Feser’s
argument shows) by the state and existence of S immediately prior to t in
conjunction with there being no sufficiently destructive factors operative (à
la transtemporal accounts), or by the very nature of persistent existence as
the maintenance or non-disruption of a state of unchanging actuality (à la no-
change accounts), or by the metaphysical necessity of persistence in the
absence of sufficient destructive factors (à la propositional necessity
accounts), and so on. Feser has given no reason to rule out any of these
explanations. I conclude, then, that EIT is not at all threatened by TPCP and
what Feser says on its behalf.

Schmid’s (2021) characterization [yep, that’s a me, Mario] differs further
still in terms of the domain of quantification and modal register:

For these three reasons, nothing in the argument at hand should worry the
inertialist.

Necessity accounts explain persistence by appeal to metaphysical
necessity.[15] I divide such accounts into two basic kinds: _propositional_
and _objectual_ necessity accounts.

Consider one of my no-change accounts. For S to **_fail_** to exist at m
despite existing from [m*, m), m* < m, is for some **_change_** to occur.[4]
But a change occurs only if some factor causally induces said change. Hence,
if no factor causally induces a change, then the change won’t occur. Thus, if
no factor causally induces S to fail to exist at m despite existing from [m*,
m), then S exists at m. Once we add that nothing came along to causally induce
this—that is, once we add that nothing came along to destroy S from m* to m—it
simply follows that S exists at m. Here, we seem to have a perfectly
respectable, perfectly legitimate explanation of S’s existence at m, and this
explanation adduces facts outside of or extrinsic to S at m. And the same is
true of the other no-change accounts I surveyed.

Once more, however, this response doesn’t work. First, merely from the fact
that no essential component of something accounts for its existence, it
doesn’t follow that it is thereby a dependent thing. Even considering
something in which essence and existence are identical, its essence cannot
_account_ for its existence, for then its existence would be accounting for
itself—it would be pulling itself up by its own metaphysical bootstraps. But,
clearly, it doesn’t follow that something in which essence and existence are
identical is a dependent thing. Second, even if every essence-existence
composite—even at non-first moments of their existence—were _dependent_ , this
is ambiguous between _concurrent, sustaining causal_ dependence and
_explanatory_ dependence. The former disambiguation is question-begging in
this dialectical context, since the very question at issue is whether essence-
existence composites require a concurrent, sustaining cause. But the latter
disambiguation is compatible with EIT, for there are hosts of inertialist-
friendly metaphysical accounts on which things’ continuance is _explained_.

Third, recall the fundamental question with which we’re concerned: what
explains temporal objects’ moment-by-moment existence? ONA provides a
satisfying explanation: any non-N temporal object, at any moment at which it
exists, is either caused or realized by, grounded in, or constituted by some
fundamental thing. Persistence of non-N objects, then, is explained in terms
of some kind of conservation or sustenance.[22] All that’s left to explain,
then, is the persistence of N. And surely there’s an explanation of that at
hand. Why does N persist in existence? Because (i) N is temporal (and so
liable to persist), and (ii) N is necessarily existent—it cannot fail to exist
and, _a fortiori_ , cannot cease to exist.

Tendency-disposition accounts explain persistent existence by appeal to some
_tendency_ or _disposition_ of things to continue in existence. There are at
least three closely-related tendency-disposition accounts in the literature:
Beaudoin’s (2007, pp. 88-89), Benocci’s (2018, pp. 59-63), and Oderberg’s
(2014, pp. 349-353).[2] I shall take these in order, beginning with Beaudoin.

A second worry one might raise is that while there may not be a physical
sustaining cause for this ground layer of physical reality, there must
nevertheless be a _non-physical_ cause sustaining it in being. But once again,
this misunderstands the dialectical context at hand. For even if it’s true
that a non-physical sustaining cause is required, nothing in step three
justifies this. Step three simply adduces a broader physical context in which
non-fundamental physical objects are situated. But no reason (thus far) has
been given as to why there must exist a non-physical sustaining cause of this
fundamental layer of physical reality. This bridges nicely into _step four_ ,
one wherein Feser aims to do precisely that.

Perhaps the explanation is in terms of one of those very divine persons (the
Father, say)? But once again this will undercut the Neo-Platonic proof. For
this explanation amounts to the proposal that one of the x1, x2, … xn explains
the unity of _those very x’s_. But once this kind of explanation is granted,
then it seems that the unity of the fundamental composite object(s) could be
explained in virtue of one (or more) of its _parts_. If one of those very x’s
can explain the unity of them all, then it seems this should equally be the
case when the ontological items in question (the x’s) are _parts_ (again, in
the very broad classical theistic understanding of parts). And hence it would
not necessarily be the case that any composite object must be explained in
terms of some extrinsic sustaining cause.

Feser offers another argument against EIT from contingent natures. He begins
with the following illustration:

Recall once more that we left the characterization of the positive destruction
of a perduring object in a relativistic space-time to this section. To
positively destroy an achronal part p of O on achronal surface s is to
actively prevent p from existing on s, such that O perdures on the portion of
SCong(O) to the absolute past of s, and in such a way that p would have
existed on s had the active prevention not occurred.

Indeed, even in the case of the radically independent God of classical theism,
there are a whole host of necessary conditions or presuppositions of his
existence. For instance, God’s existing and being the thing he is presuppose
the laws of identity and non-contradiction. And despite plausibly presupposing
these as necessary conditions, God is still not dependent on another for his
existence.

The account is as follows. For temporal concrete object O to _fail_ to exist
at t despite existing from [t*, t), where t* < t, is for some _change_ to
occur.[31] But, plausibly, a change occurs only if some factor causally
induces said change. It’s not as though a raging tiger, or thousands of
photons, or whatever could just spring uncausedly into existence in this room
right now; that would require some cause.[32] Moreover, it’s not like New
York, or my house, or this article could pop out of existence uncausedly; such
changes would require some cause. From this observation it follows that if no
factor causally induces a change, then the change won’t occur. Thus, if no
factor causally induces O to fail to exist at t despite existing from [t*, t),
then O exists at t. Once we add that nothing came along to causally induce
this—that is, once we add that nothing came along to destroy O from t* to t—it
simply follows that O exists at t. Here, we seem to have a perfectly
respectable, perfectly legitimate explanation of O’s existence at t, and this
explanation does not presuppose the prior obtaining of the explanandum (i.e.,
O’s existence at t).

Schmid’s account is explicitly written in endurantist terms and is not
compatible with the orthodox (i.e., Minkowskian) interpretation of relativity.
Nonetheless, Schmid’s account can be easily rendered consistent with the
relativistic and perdurantist accounts of existential inertia we discussed in
section 2. For example, for globally hyperbolic relativistic space-times,
times t-1 and t can be replaced by appropriately related Cauchy surfaces;
meanwhile, instead of considering O at distinct times or on distinct Cauchy
surfaces, we can consider proper parts of O located at distinct times or on
distinct Cauchy surfaces.

Positive destruction of enduring objects in Galilean/Newtonian space-time: to
positively destroy O at time t is to actively bring about O’s cessation at t,
such that O endures through [t’, t) but not [t’, t], where t’ < t.[7]

Thanks to philosopher of physics DJ Linford for co-authoring this section as
well as parts of Section 4. Fair use rules apply to the whole post (i.e.,
**cite** the post if you’re going to use its content). For this section, I’ll
use ‘we’ and ‘our’, since this is co-authored with DJ.

The PSR Response, however, won’t work. For, plausibly, past things can and do
legitimately explain (at least in large part) the existence of present
things.[13] Indeed, it seems difficult to square our ordinary, common sense
explanatory practices (and, for that matter, our scientific practices) with a
position on which past things lack explanatory force. Delving into arguments
in favor of the legitimacy of past things’ explaining present things, though,
would take us too far afield given present purposes. Two notes suffice for
now.

The inertialist, moreover, can extend Oderberg’s argument: given that there
_is_ such a tendency, and given that, in conjunction with other conditions
adumbrated earlier, this tendency _explains_ the persistence of temporal
concrete objects, a continuously operative sustaining cause or ground of the
moment-by-moment existence of temporal concreta is explanatorily _otiose_.
‘Shave it off’, sayeth Occam’s razor and the existential inertialist.

[2] Another way to see this is to imagine that while all the oxygen in your
surrounding environment is removed, there is nevertheless some continual
source of oxygen within you. (Perhaps your lungs acquire a new ability to
generate oxygen anew.) In this scenario, you simply _wouldn’t die_ despite the
utter absence of oxygen in your environment. This shows that it is the status
of factors _within_ you upon which you are dependent in this case, _not_
factors _outside_ of (external to, extrinsic to) you.

22\. So, if act-potency pluralists do not accept generic existence, then they
should not accept act-potency pluralism. (19-21)

What this shows is that inertial maintenance of location L does _not_ require
that ‘being in L’ somehow ‘become built into the essence of the cup’. But by
exactly parallel reasoning to what Hsiao and Sanders provide (in the case of
existence), it seems that such inertial maintenance _would_ require this. At
the very least, nothing Hsiao and Sanders say here gives us any reason to
think that existence is relevantly dissimilar to being in location L. And
that’s precisely what they would _need_ to show for their argument to work.

Second, such a tendency is not entailed by CTST as such, and hence it
represents an auxiliary thesis that lowers the probability of the hypothesis.
Thus, greater expectation of the data is gained only at the expense of
lowering the hypothesis’s probability.

[1] For present purposes, we will assume that material objects are composed of
point-like proper parts and ignore the complications posed by quantum
mechanics.

Second, even if it is true that, because they depend on one another for their
actual existence at each time t at which they are conjoined, form and matter
at t require an explanation outside themselves for their actual compositional
existence, this is compatible with all or nearly all of the accounts of the
metaphysics of existential inertia articulated earlier. Consider transtemporal
accounts according to which O-at-t-1 (in conjunction with a few other facts)
explains the existence of O-at-t. In this case, we avoid vicious explanatory
circularity, since we are not explaining the form of O-at-t by the matter of
O-at-t (or vice versa); instead, we are explaining O-at-t by O-at-t-1, which
amounts neither to self-causation, nor to self-explanation, nor to vicious
explanatory circularity. Or consider propositional necessity accounts: the
conjoined-ness of the form and matter at t is explained by something outside
of themselves, to wit, the metaphysical necessity of their continued
conjoined-ness in the absence of sufficiently destructive factors operator.
And so on down the list of metaphysical accounts—in each case, vicious
circularity will be avoided, since each of them adduces factors beyond O at t
(and beyond O’s form at t and matter at t) to explain O at t (for each non-
first time t of O’s life).

What **I** make of the argument depends on whether eternalism or presentism is
true.

First, a dialectical point: Feser himself agrees that past things can causally
explain present things.[14] Second (and more importantly), a point concerning
defeaters: _even if_ one holds that past things cannot legitimately explain
present things, what matters for present purposes is that neither Feser nor
the (hypothetical) proponent of the PSR Response have—in the dialectical
context at hand—given those who think the present existence of an act-potency
composite object could be explained by the some past thing (say, the
immediately temporally prior[15] state and existence of the object in question
in conjunction with the absence of sufficiently destructive factors operative)
any reason to abandon their view. And in that case, the PSR Response and
premise seven face an undercutting defeater, since they (i) require it to be
false that the present existence of such an object could be so explained, but
(ii) do not provide adequate reason to think it is false. So, I do not think
the second response (the PSR Response) on behalf of Feser succeeds.

With a **presentist** hat on, I say that change is (roughly) the following: x
doesn’t exist at some point, and then at some later point x exists, or else x
exists at some point, and then at some later point x doesn’t exist (where x is
some positive ontological item). (If we want to disallow coming to be and
passing away as changes, we can modify the account as follows: S is F at some
point and then at some later point S is ~F, or else S is ~F at some point and
then at some later point S is F.)

[17] One might think that the terminus of the chain of explanations—while not
explained by any _further_ proposition—is nevertheless _self-explanatory_. I
have two responses. First, I find it plausible that nothing can explain or
account for why it _itself_ is true (or obtains, or exists) at all. For in
order to have any explanatory power in the first place, it would ‘already’ (as
it were) have to be true (obtain, exist). (‘Already’ expresses not temporal
but ontological priority.) Plausibly, one cannot merely _presuppose_ the very
thing for which one sought illumination. (Also, just imagine: if I ask why _q_
is true, it’s no use responding ‘because _q_ is true’. Surely, I say, this
explains nothing!) But suppose I’m wrong about the impossibility of self-
explanation. Suppose, in other words, that some propositions can explain their
own truth. Presumably, this will involve the proposition having a kind of
‘intrinsic intelligibility’—once the proposition is grasped, there is no
mystery concerning why it is true. This brings us to my second response:
plausibly, _no_ explanation of persistence will be self-explanatory—in which
case, each explanation of persistence will end in an unexplained primitive.
And in that case, the fact that Schmid’s propositional necessity account ends
in an unexplained primitive is not a mark against it as an explanation of
persistence. Consider explanations of persistence that deny EIT. Such
explanations either adduce one or more _atemporal_ concrete objects that
sustain temporal objects or else an infinitely descending chain of more
fundamental temporal concrete objects sustaining or conserving less
fundamental temporal concrete objects (of which the former aren’t parts). But
surely neither the proposition <there is such an atemporal concrete object>
nor <there is such an infinitely descending chain> are self-explanatory.

The second metaphysical argument they provide runs: “Second, if dinosaurs did
have existence built into their nature in the same way that being a reptile is
built into their nature, then they could never cease to exist and would have
to exist forever” (Hsiao and Sanders, Forthcoming). Hsiao and Sanders do not
define what something’s being ‘built into’ a nature means. We will understand
F’s being ‘built into’ the nature of S to mean that F is either an essential
property of S or else an essential part of S.

We can now define an _achronal part_ P of O such that “(i) P’s path is an
achronal slice of O’s path, (ii) P and O are co-composed at P’s path, and
(iii) P is a part of O at P’s path” (Gilmore 2008, p. 1228). (For an
alternative definition in terms of the intersection of a Cauchy surface with
O’s path, see Calosi and Fano 2015, pp. 287-288.) O can then be said to
_mereologically perdure_ just in case O has a “sufficiently full distribution”
of achronal parts, e.g., “perhaps one for each achronal slice of its path,
perhaps one for each continuous temporal ‘chunk’ of its path, perhaps even one
for each sum of achronal slices of its path” (Gilmore 2008, p. 1228) or, as on
Calosi and Fano’s version, one for each intersection of a Cauchy surface with
O’s path. Moreover, O _locationally perdures_ just in case O is exactly
located at the space-time regions where O persists. We can also define
mereological endurance, i.e., O mereologically endures just in case O persists
but does not have such a distribution of achronal parts. (For the sake of
intuition, compare what we’d say in Newtonian or Galilean space-time: O
mereologically endures just in case O has all of O’s parts at each of the
times that O exists instead of having a scattering of parts across space-
time.) Likewise, we can define locational endurance, i.e., O locationally
endures just in case all of O’s exact locations are achronal regions.

Now let P be the proposition <O exists> and suppose P is true at t. By PCP, P
can only be false at any t’ (where t’ > t) if something already actual
causally removes P’s worldly correlate. But P’s worldly correlate is O (or O’s
existing). So, P can only be false at any t’ if something already actual
causally removes or destroys O. Hence, if nothing already actual causally
removes or destroys O between t and t’, P remains true from t to t’. But the
proposition <P remains true from t to t’> entails that O persists from t to
t’. So, if nothing already actual causally removes or destroys O between t and
t’, O persists from t to t’. And that, it seems, delivers EIT. (Bearing in
mind, of course, the points about absences _not_ being actual.)

[F]rom the fact that it _is_ necessary, it follows that it exists in a purely
actual way, rather than by virtue of having potentialities that need to be
actualized. For if it had such potentialities, then its existence would be
_contingent_ upon the existence of something which actualizes those
potentialities—in which case it wouldn’t really exist in a _necessary_ way
after all. (2017, p. 159)

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fmajestyofreason.wordpress.com%2F2021%2F07%2F31%2Fso-you-think-you-understand-existential-inertia%2F&signup_flow=account)

Now suppose, along with Hsiao and Sanders, that existence is essential to S.
All that follows from this is that S couldn’t exist without S existing. And
this is true. What does _not_ follow is that ‘necessarily, S exists’ or ‘it is
impossible for S to go out of existence’. These are de dicto necessities that
are not entailed by the de re necessity of existence’s being essentially had
by S. It is thus a non-sequitur to infer the impossibility of something’s
going out of existence from the mere fact that existence is essential to it.
All we can infer from existence’s being essential to S is that necessarily, if
S exists, then S exists. Nothing follows, however, about the impossibility of
S’s going out of existence.

In response, and to reiterate the second point above, note first that EIT is
compatible with no contingent thing inertially persisting. For EIT quantifies
not over contingent things but rather temporal concrete objects; and it is
open to the inertialist to affirm the existence of a necessarily existent
temporal concrete object. The argument therefore fails to address EIT as such.

Second, some notes. First, my EIT quantifies only over a _sub-set_ of temporal
concreta. This allows the inertialist to affirm that at least _some_ temporal
concreta (e.g., perhaps non-fundamental, composite physical objects) are
sustained or conserved in being from without. Second, my EIT only specifies
that every inertially persistent object O does not ontologically depend on
concrete objects _that are not parts of O_. This allows for views on which
composite objects ontologically depend on their parts.

So neither prime matter as the material cause of a material substance, nor
substantial form as its formal cause, can impart to the material substance
they compose a tendency to persist in existence.

I have five criticisms. First, the argument is quite dialectically limited
insofar as it rests on a hylemorphic account of temporal, material objects.
Audi’s point about hylemorphism and existential inertia is as true here as it
was in response to the first argument. ( _Assuming_ , that is, that Feser’s
argument here succeeds—something we wouldn’t grant.)

So no material substance has a tendency of itself to persist in existence once
it exists.

To explore how one might update the existential inertia thesis for
relativistic space-times, we begin by introducing a three-fold distinction
between two non-relativistic space-times, i.e., Newtonian and Galilean space-
times, and one simple relativistic space-time, i.e., Minkowski space-time. In
Newtonian space-time, at each time, the universe is a three-dimensional
Euclidean space consisting of a collection of objectively simultaneous spatial
points. The spatial points persist over time; moreover, objects can be at
absolute rest by occupying the same spatial point(s) at successive times. In
Galilean space-time, the universe, at each time, is again a three-dimensional
Euclidean space composed of a collection of objectively simultaneous spatial
points. However, absolute rest does not exist in Galilean space-time; for that
reason, spatial points do not persist through time, even though material
objects may. On either Newtonian or Galilean space-time, material objects can
either be wholly located at each of the times that they exist and so endure or
have temporal parts located at each of the times at which they exist and so
perdure.

Second, it seems plausible that we could use ‘possibility’ instead of
‘potentiality’ to run the argument. For even if there is no _potentiality_ for
O’s existence/non-existence in the sense of some disposition pointed towards
an outcome that can be manifested or elicited when exposed to a relevant
stimulus, it seems plausible that we can nevertheless legitimately speak of
the _possibility_ that O ceases to exist. And, plausibly, the same motivations
favoring CP equally favor the principle that when a possibility is not actual
from [t*, t) but _is_ actual at t (such that t* < t), something already actual
causally brings about the possibility’s actuality at t. This principle will
equally facilitate the inference to EIT.

I have two points to make in response. First, while it’s true that Oppy would
have to engage this fundamental question, it is _also_ true that the onus of
justification is on Feser and defenders of sustaining-cause-arguments to
_demonstrate_ that any temporal thing concurrently depends on an efficient
sustaining cause at any moment which it exists. They are, after all, in the
business of giving a _positive argument_ for God’s existence. So, even if Oppy
does not answer the question concerning what explains such beings’ existence
at a given (non-first) moment of their existence, that would by no means
vindicate such arguments.

Now suppose an atheist charges me with question-begging. Following Feser’s
rejoinder above, suppose I respond:

But suppose I grant all this. All the child should conclude is that—precisely
because there is nothing about a contingent thing (or its nature) that tells
us whether it exists—there must be some other factor that explains why the
contingent thing exists. In other words, we need some reason why the
contingent thing is in reality at all. But this, of course, is an entirely
separate question from why, _once in existence_ , the thing _continues to
exist_. And, indeed, we would argue that the child would recognize the
plausibility of existential inertia as applied to such continued existence.
Consider the following dialogue between me and the child.

I think there are very obvious causal aspects to the constitution and
continued existence of compound entities… [C]onsider the explanations given in
secondary education physics and chemistry of the physical bonds that hold
compound objects together, say, how elementary particles constitute an atom
through continuous interaction. Physics, chemistry, and biology simply do not
depict the entities they study as things that passively continue to exist as
long as nothing destroys them; they continuously and actively preserve
themselves through the interaction of their constituents. (2021, p. 99)

“2. In a similar fashion, you say that our observation of objects ceasing to
exist always and only due to a positive cause is superiorly explained by EIT
than by CTST. Now the problem with this is that, strictly speaking, we have
never observed (nor could we observe) the occurrence of any *positive* causal
destruction. The reason is that the very notion is incoherent. Positive causal
destruction implies that the non-existence of a concrete object O is the
effect of — brought about by — some cause. However, ‘non-existence’ cannot be
an effect. Effects must exist in order to stand in the causal relations they
do. It follows that objects cannot cease to exist or corrupt through being
caused to do so. But then, what does EIT predict over CTST?”

The upshot of the objection that there could be non-intrinsic, uncaused
properties is that if correct, it would entail that one cannot move from the
distinction of essence and _esse_ to the caused character of _esse_ in
essence- _esse_ composites, and because setting up a causal series in the line
of _esse_ is essential to the argumentation that Aquinas is making, the
possibility that _esse_ could be an uncaused yet distinct (non-intrinsic)
property of a thing would undermine Aquinas’s argument from the outset. (
_Ibid_ )

The purpose of this section, then, is to criticize any argument against EIT by
appeal to Aquinas’s _De Ente_ argument. The problem is that the _De Ente_
argument requires pluralism about being. But many philosophers have pushed
quite forceful criticisms of pluralism about being. See, for instance,
[Merricks (2019), “The Only Way To
Be”](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-CVP7ELiWPfem4cwhUq0f-NFlw1w1l2t/view?usp=sharing),
for a pretty forceful attack on pluralism. [Fun fact: I had Dr. Trenton
Merricks on my channel to discuss this article! [You can watch it
here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZhSnuXDkswI&pp=sAQA).]

4\. As evidenced by Oderberg’s position, the Classical Theist can take a view
according to which [contingent] things have a natural tendency toward
existing, which is nevertheless ultimately dependent upon God. On this view,
it seems like the Bayesian argument does not go through. For while God could
in principle annihilate some objects, that would count as a miracle (a
suspension of the natural order) which, by definition, is irregular. Hence,
like EIT, it would be far more likely for us to observe things persisting in
existence.

[4] This point against cosmic time as a candidate for absolute time has
previously been made in, e.g., Saudek (2020, p. 56) and Lockwood (2007, pp.
117-118). As Gerald Whitrow describes, “cosmic time is essentially a
statistical concept, like the temperature of a gas” (1961, p. 246).

Note first that EIT only claims that temporal concrete objects _or some subset
thereof_ persist in the absence of both sustenance and destruction. Thus, even
if this were a case of a concrete object being sustained in existence (or
requiring sustenance in order to exist), it wouldn’t serve as a counterexample
to EIT.

[18] I could go further: this primitive is either contingent or necessary. But
contingent propositions—precisely because they _genuinely could have been
false_ —seem to call out for further explanations of why they are true. (Cf.
Pruss (2006) for an extended defense of the thesis that every contingent
proposition has an explanation.) Plausibly, then, the primitive must be
_necessary_. But then _any_ explanation of _p_ terminates in a primitive
necessity, and so surely it’s no mark against Schmid’s propositional necessity
account that its explanation of _p_ terminates in a primitive necessity.

So much for Schmid’s account—let’s turn to Mackie’s. Unlike Schmid, Mackie
specifies that the transtemporal explanation at play is _causation_. In
particular, Mackie suggests treating a physical object as “a self-maintaining
process or cluster of such processes” and holds that “[t]he earlier phase of
[such] a self-maintaining process surely brings about, or helps to bring
about, the later phase” (1974, p. 156). According to Mackie’s transtemporal
account, then, earlier phases of temporal concrete object O cause (bring
about, produce) later phases of O.

**Third** , I’ll be using footnotes in this post. The footnotes of a given
section are at the bottom of the section as a whole. For instance, any
footnotes within Section 3 (including 3.1 through 3.5) will be at the very
bottom of Section 3 immediately before Section 4.

The argument against pluralism in what follows is applied to act-potency
pluralism, but it applies _mutatis mutandis_ to the De Ente argument—simply
replace ‘a-existence’ and ‘p-existence’ with ‘d-existence’ and ‘c-existence’
(representing ‘divine existence’ and ‘creaturely existence’,
respectively).[24]

Let’s turn, then, to _step two_ : wholes cannot cause the combination of their
parts. Feser writes the following in connection to a chair (the whole) and its
parts:

Second, EIT does not maintain that a being ‘explains its own continual
existence without something distinct from itself’. As we saw earlier, there
are many different metaphysical accounts that adduce explanatory facts
_distinct_ from O at t to _explain_ O at t.

_Complementarity Principle_ : For any object x and any non-trivial disposition
D to display a manifestation of the kind M in (and only in) the conditions of
the kind C, if x has D then x also has the disposition D’ not to display a
manifestation of the kind M in (and only in) the conditions other than those
of the kind C. (2018, p. 62)

_How_ do the parts of a composite come together to form the whole? It can’t be
the composite _itself_ that causes this to happen. … [A]t any particular
moment, the existence of the whole depends on the existence and proper
arrangement of the parts. And the chair as a whole can’t be the _cause_ of
those parts existing, and being assembled in just the right way, at that
moment. We would in that case have an explanatory vicious circle, insofar as
the existence of the whole would depend on the existence and arrangement of
the parts, and the existence and arrangement of the parts would depend on the
existence of the whole. (2017, pp. 70-71)

Kvanvig, J.L. & McCann, H.J. (1988). Divine Conservation and the Persistence
of the World. In T.V. Morris (Ed.) _Divine and Human Action: Essays in the
Metaphysics of Theism_. Cornell University Press.

“One might object that CTST likewise predicts a dearth of observational
evidence for sustaining efficient causes, since—so the objection goes—the
power to sustain something in existence could only be had and exercised by
God. Such a power is an incommunicable characteristic of God (so the objection
goes). In response, I note that this is not entailed by CTST as such. Instead,
it is an auxiliary hypothesis that must be added to CTST. Thus, while one
might add it to CTST to predict the data at hand, doing so lowers CTST’s
probability. (Even if one disagrees and thinks that the incommunicability
thesis here is entailed by CTST, we still have a dearth of observational
evidence of instrumental sustaining efficient causes in chains of efficient
sustaining causes. And surely creaturely instrumental sustenance is not
debarred by CTST. My broader point, then, stands.)”

On Oderberg’s view, while “it is logically impossible for a thing to have the
tendency to continue to exist without existing in the first place,” this
doesn’t entail that “its mere existence explains the tendency. So we do not
have any explanatory or other circle here” ( _ibid_ ). In short, the
explanation of why concrete objects persist in existence is that they have a
_tendency_ to do so; and they have a tendency to do so _not_ because they
exist or persist, but rather because of the _kind_ of things they are—they
have such a tendency by their very _natures_. (There is of course the further
question of why they essentially have such a tendency. But now we are asking a
_separate explanatory question_ from what explains their persistence.
Moreover, it’s not clear why this would be any more mysterious than why
objects have other tendencies or dispositions by nature.)

Instead of interpreting Feynman diagrams literally, realists about quantum
field theory should say that, to the degree that the sum should be interpreted
realistically at all, reality is represented by the full sum and not by
particular terms in the sum. Moreover, while electrons and photons are
represented in Feynman diagrams as discrete particles, they should more
accurately be understood as quantized vibrations in their respective fields.
The “trajectories” in distinct Feynman diagrams have questionable physical
significance, both because the “trajectories” can interfere with each other
and because topologically equivalent diagrams featuring _distinct_
intermediate particles correspond to numerically the same terms in the sum
(Passon 2019, pp. 11-2). Realistically interpreted, the full sum represents
(perhaps) some complex, knotted, spatio-temporally extended and difficult
(perhaps impossible) to imagine mess of vibrations in the electron and photon
fields. Whether a localized event occurs in which two discrete particles
momentarily occupy a common vertex is at least unclear. Thus, whether the
absorption of a photon by an electron can legitimately be said to be an
example of a state of affairs in which a cause comes to be instantaneous with
its effect by occupying numerically one space-time point is at least unclear,
if not completely unfounded.

We could put Oderberg’s argument for the tendency to persist as follows. We
observe temporal concrete objects ceasing to exist when and only when
subjected to sufficiently destructive factors/forces. But this universal
phenomenon cries out for some explanation, just as objects’ ceasing to exist
when and only when next to objects twice their size does. The best or only
explanation for this phenomenon is that such objects possess some tendency to
cease to exist when and only when subject to such sufficiently destructive
factors.[6] But tendencies imply their complements; in other words, the
possession of a tendency to cease to exist in certain conditions—“a specific
disposition activated by a relatively limited kind and range of
stimuli”—implies the possession of “a tendency to _continue_ to exist absent
those stimuli” ( _ibid_ ). Hence, temporal concrete objects have a tendency to
persist in existence.[7]

A third no-change account is as follows. For simplicity, I’ll assume
endurantism and Newtonian or Galilean space-time. Nothing hangs on this,
though—an exactly similar account can be cast in perdurantist and/or
Relativistic space-time terms _mutatis mutandis_. (Again, my goal is not to
_prove_ or _positively justify_ the account; instead, I’m simply
_articulating_ an account that—if true—furnishes an inertialist-friendly
explanation of persistence. I only need the account to be _rationally
defensible_.)

[21] I will use ‘N’ as a singular noun, but I stress that it stands for one
_or more_ objects of the kind articulated in ONA.

I conclude, then, that the argument for EIT under consideration survives the
objection at hand.

Standard conceptions of endurance and perdurance are not obviously compatible
with relativity. In order for O to objectively and wholly occupy a time—as is
required on a standard conception of endurance—all of O’s proper parts need to
occupy the same time, that is, all of O’s proper parts need to be objectively
simultaneous with each other. On the other hand, on a standard conception of
perdurance, while O is a space-time worm, each of O’s temporal parts occupies
a distinct time. In order for a temporal part p of O to occupy a time, the
proper parts of p need to be located at the same time, that is, to be
objectively simultaneous with each other.

This is not a proposed counterexample to the PPC. Instead, it reveals that
there are ways that features can be present in total causes that Feser’s
argument neglects. In particular, features can be present within total causes
in a way I shall term _conditional potencies_. O possesses a conditional
potency for F provided that O, when conjoined with some other condition or
thing O*, gives rise to a system (O-O*) that manifests F. The red was not
actually or formally present in the total cause (the two chemical species),
but it was nevertheless present in the total cause as a conditional potency of
each reactant species. The first reactant species had the conditional potency,
when combined with the second species, to produce red; likewise with the
second species.

[6] Another argument for EIT—one I shan’t pursue beyond this footnote—is that
the denial that temporal concrete objects (or some subset thereof) persist
inertially will ultimately have to admit a timeless sustaining cause of
temporal reality or some portion thereof. But—so the argument continues—a
sustaining causal relation cannot obtain between a timeless, immutable being
and the temporal world. This latter claim has been defended by several able
philosophers—see, for instance, Fales (1997), Rundle (2004, ch. 4), Mullins
(2016, ch. 5), and Craig (2001, ch. 3).

Finally, the objection’s inference from “temporal objects have a natural
tendency to persist” to “it would therefore be miraculous (and hence
improbable) for God to remove his sustenance” is a non-sequitur. After all,
many classical theists think things have a natural tendency to expire (in the
sense that things are disposed to cease to exist when a certain manifestation
condition (say, removal of divine sustenance) is met). And yet this clearly
doesn’t imply that objects’ persistence is a miracle. Moreover, (i) many
features of objects are “non-natural” in the sense that the object in question
naturally has different, incompatible features, and yet (ii) this does not
(typically) involve any miracle. Consider, for instance, that there is a sense
in which humans are naturally two-legged.[Fn] But nearly all instances of
zero- or one-leggedness in humans are not miracles. This point generalizes to
any physical, genetic, or psychological defect or illness anywhere in the
biological world. The objection, then, simply rests on a non-sequitur.

But perhaps Feser’s thought is one about _fundamentality_ or _grounding_ :
wholes are dependent on their parts insofar as parts are more fundamental than
and/or ground the existence of their wholes. But while this might be true in
some cases, it’s by no means clear that all cases of part-whole relationships
fit this schema (especially given the wide classical theistic understanding of
parts). For it seems eminently plausible that some wholes ground the existence
of their parts. As Baddorf writes:

We therefore have the first two scope questions that any inertial thesis must
answer: Does the thesis quantify over temporal or non-temporal things (or
both)? Does the thesis quantify over concreta or abstracta (or both)? For
reasons just articulated, I think the thesis should quantify only over
temporal (or spatiotemporal) concreta.

We consider two theories of persistence—perdurance and endurance—and three
kinds of space-time—Newtonian, Galilean, and relativistic. We will use our
answers to the taxonomic questions previously considered to build inertial
theses for the various possible combinations of theories of persistence with
kinds of space-time while avoiding the various problems afflicting the
inertial theses of Audi, Schmid, and company. We will then define the
Existential Inertia Thesis (EIT) as the disjunction of the various inertial
theses.[1] We start by articulating our inertial thesis for endurance and
Newtonian or Galilean space-times:

Fundamentally, then, my challenge for the Trinitarian proponent of the Neo-
Platonic proof is as follows. When it comes to explaining to unity
(togetherness, conjoined-ness, compresence) of the distinct divine persons
within one being (the Godhead or G), the explanation is either (i) internal to
G, (ii) external to G, (iii) G itself, or else (iv) there is no explanation.
But if the explanation is internal to G, then something _within_ a unified
plurality can explain the unity of said plurality—in which case, the same
could apply to the objects within NPCP’s domain of quantification, thereby
undermining NPCP’s demand for an outside explanation of such objects. If the
explanation is external to G, then there is something outside of or external
to God which explains something about God, which is obviously incompatible
with classical theism. If the explanation is G itself, then an object within
which there is a unified plurality can explain the unity of said plurality
without recourse to any external thing—in which case, the same could apply to
the objects within NPCP’s domain of quantification, thereby undermining NPCP’s
demand for an outside explanation of such objects. Finally, if there is no
explanation, then once again the same could apply to the domain of NPCP,
thereby undermining it. Thus, either classical theism is false, or else NPCP
(and, hence, the Neo-Platonic proof itself) is undermined.

Fourth, consider again conditional potencies. Arguably, although form and
matter may interdepend with respect to the beginning of a substance’s
existence (i.e., with respect to the origination of the form-matter
composition), it does not follow that they thereby interdepend at every moment
at which they exist. This is because—for all Feser has shown—there may very
well be a conditional potency within each that accounts for why, when combined
with the other, they are able to manifest some further ‘feature’ (namely, a
tendency to persist).[8] Consider again the case of the chemical species. The
first species will not manifest redness unless the second is present, while
the second will not manifest redness unless the first is present. But all this
demands is an explanation for why they combined in the first place, since that
original composition is what actualized the conditional potencies to
transition into a state of actuality. And once the composition’s components
have their conditional potencies actualized in the first place, they remain in
a state of actuality unless separated by (say) some chemical or physical
process.

_Monism about being_ ( _monism_ for short) says that everything enjoys the
same way of being. So monism implies, for example, that if there are pure sets
and if there are mountains, then pure sets exist in just the way that
mountains do. Monism can be contrasted with _pluralism about being_ (
_pluralism_ for short). Pluralism says that some entities enjoy one way of
being but others enjoy another way, or other ways, of being. (2019, p. 593)

One might object that any view which allows there to be nothing in virtue of
which an essence-existence composite exists suffers from an untoward
_bruteness_ or _inexplicability_. But this is simply untrue. First, we can
give _principled reasons_ for thinking that something perfect, unlimited, and
necessarily existent— _unlike_ that which is imperfect, limited, and/or
contingent—is uniquely unexplained. Rasmussen (2019) argues, for instance,
that limitation, contingency, and imperfection—unlike that which is unlimited,
necessary, and perfect—seem to call out for deeper explanations. (Consider:
plausibly, to have one’s existence owed to another is a limitation or
imperfection; hence, whatever is unlimited and perfect doesn’t have its
existence owed to another.) Second, such views can accept very robust versions
of the principle of sufficient reason—e.g., that whatever is contingent,
imperfect, or limited requires an (outside) explanation. And, importantly,
there doesn’t seem to be any unique advantage accrued to someone who adopts a
version of the principle of sufficient reason that whatever is such that its
essence and existence are numerically distinct requires an (outside)
explanation, and nor does there seem to be any reason favoring such a
principle that doesn’t favor the former, neo-classical-theist-friendly
principle.[5]

Third, if everything enjoys one-and-the-same generic existence, then ‘being’
is (or can be) predicated univocally of act and potency. But Feser (2017, pp.
176-184, esp. 180) is explicit that—according to the version of act-potency
pluralism presently under consideration—being is _not_ predicated univocally
of act and potency but instead only _analogically_. Thus, act-potency
pluralists should not accept generic existence. Merricks extends this third
reason further:

While many philosophers outside of philosophy of physics may be tempted to
interpret Feynman diagrams (or popular science documentaries) literally,
Feynman diagrams are merely a useful heuristic for representing terms in an
infinitely long sum, where each term in the sum represents an increasingly
complex process, involving larger numbers of vertices and particles (or
virtual particles). As Oliver Passon describes the view of Feynman diagrams
popular among philosophers of physics, Feynman diagrams (emphasis his)
“visualize _formulae_ and not physical _processes_ ” (2019, pg. 1; see
Passon’s paper, and references therein, for additional arguments against the
naive literal reading of Feynman diagrams). And as Friebe, et al, write, the
“intuitively attractive picture of ‘particle exchange’” is a “metaphor” that
“occurs only in the Feynman graphs for perturbation calculations” that should
not be understood as a description of a real process unfolding in space-time
(Friebe, et al, 2018, pp. 241-2). More generally, Feynman diagrams “do not
have the task of imaging spatiotemporal processes. They cannot play that role
for reasons of principle” (ibid, pg. 241).

But remember that t’ represents any arbitrary time later than t. Hence, if
nothing already actual casually actualizes O’s going out of existence from [t,
t’] for any t’ > t, O will not go out of existence from [t, t’]. Hence, if
nothing already actual casually actualizes O’s going out of existence from [t,
t’] for any t’ > t, O will persist from [t, t’].

Note: Thanks to DJ Linford for primarily authoring the following paragraphs
ending the section on transtemporal accounts!

The continuity or discreteness of time is something deserving much more
attention in debates concerning existential inertia. Pursuing this in the
requisite depth, however, would take me too far afield given my present
purpose of categorizing, developing, and sketching motivations for different
metaphysical accounts.[10] Before turning to Mackie’s transtemporal account,
though, I’ll Schmid’s (i.e., my) transtemporal account avoids the vicious
circularity worry.

[3] It is clear from context, it seems, that this is what Feser means.
Consider, for instance, that Feser seems to infer that <no material substance
has a tendency of itself to persist in existence once it exists> from the
facts that <there are no other internal principles from which such a substance
might derive such a tendency> and <form and matter are internal principles
from neither of which the substance can derive a tendency to persist>. This
inference only seems to work if ‘of itself’ expresses ‘intrinsically or
internally’.

My second reply to premise (3) is that “having existence from something _ad
extra_ ” is ambiguous. It could mean having existence _caused_ by something
else (i.e., something other than its essence), _or_ could mean having
existence _explained_ by something else. But if the former is meant, then the
inertialist will simply reject premise (3)—at least if we’re focusing on the
existence of an essence-existence composite at non-first moments of its life.
For even if its existence at a non-first moment of its life is not due to its
essence, it could still be _explained_ without reference to any (concurrent,
sustaining) cause. This, of course, was the purpose of the metaphysical
accounts of EIT. By contrast, if the latter is meant, then premise (4) is
simply false. For it does _not_ follow from the fact that x’s existence is
_explained_ by something other than x’s essence that x’s existence must
thereby participate in a _cause_ in order to exist. As we’ve seen, not all
explanations are (concurrent, sustaining) causal explanations. The
explanation—at least for non-first moments of x’s life—could instead employ a
metaphysical account of EIT. Nothing in the argument at hand provides any
reason against any such account.

Third, even ignoring the above point, there seem to be perfectly legitimate
explanations of the combination of parts that _avoid_ vicious circularity but
that _don’t_ adduce extrinsic sustaining efficient causes. We’ve already seen
a panoply of such explanations in Section 5. But also consider:

Schmid points out that explanations of present things’ existence in terms of
past things seem not only legitimate but often indispensable. Present allelic
frequencies in biological populations are explained (at least in part) in
terms of past selection pressures and past reproductive behavior; discursive
reasoning processes plausibly require _not only_ a justificatory or reasons-
based link between past consideration of the premises (on the one hand) and
acceptance of the conclusion (on the other) _but also_ a causal or explanatory
link between one’s previous consideration of the premises and one’s present
acceptance of the conclusion; and so on. In principle, argues Schmid, there
seems to be nothing debarring past things from explaining (causally or
otherwise) the existence of present things.[8]

_The physical world consists of nothing more than fermions and bosons and the
laws that govern them. But there is nothing in the nature of fermions and
bosons or the laws that govern them that entails that they have existential
inertia. Hence, there is no such feature in the physical world._

[As a concluding note, I don’t actually claim to have offered here a proper or
true analysis of change. I used ‘my analysis’ and ‘my view’ as a foil to
compare Feser’s view with an alternative view. I think the alternative view is
superior to Feser’s view, but I don’t claim ( _in this blog post_ ) that it’s
true _simpliciter_ or even _likely_ true.]

“But that’s not possible. The only things from which C could derive such a
feature would be A and B, and neither of them have the feature to grant to C.
They are both colorless. And so there is simply nowhere from which C could
derive this vibrant color. You must therefore either be lying to me, or
playing a trick on me, or your visual apparatus is malfunctioning.”

I am dependent on these things only eventually for my future existence… Take
away oxygen and I am dead, not now, however, but only shortly. Take away heat
from my environment, plunge it to absolute zero, and I am gone more quickly,
but again not immediately. Take away the sun, and the heat, most of it
hereabouts continues for eight minutes or so, so the sun is no part of its
efficient sustaining cause. Oxygen and the like are at best not sustaining,
but _perpetuating_ , and so not necessarily _concurrent_ efficient causes of
people. (Sobel 2003, p. 177)

Here’s another way to think about it. Consider again the case of mechanical
inertia. One of Feser’s reconciliations of CP with mechanical inertia is to
treat uniform rectilinear spatial motion as a mere state or condition of
unchangingness. In this way, it does not involve the kind of dynamism that CP
says requires a distinct actualizing cause. But when an object is uniformly
rectilinearly moving through space, it may be undergoing _other_ , continuous
processes of real change. These would—granting the truth of CP—require a
continuously operative actualizing cause. But this does not negate or nullify
the fact that the object is still in a state or condition of unchangingness w
_ith respect to its uniform rectilinear motion_. And so, in _this_ respect,
the object does not require a continuously operative cause, though the _other_
respects in which the object _is_ really changing _do_ (or would). And this is
precisely the proposal of no-change accounts: although the object may be
undergoing a host of real accidental changes (and thus may require continuous
causes of such changes), the object is _not_ undergoing the kind of real
dynamism or change _in respect of its actuality or existence_ that would
require a continuously operative sustaining cause.

[T]here is still a fundamental question that Oppy would have to engage. What
is it that actualizes the potential of chair to possess such a nature that it
can continue being red from T1 to T2 without any external interference? Oppy
will be hard pressed to find an explanation that doesn’t bottom out in an
uncaused caused. (2020, p. 8)

Kerr, G. 2015. _Aquinas’s Way to God: The Proof in the De Ente et Essentia_.
New York: Oxford University Press.

To be sure, there are more besides. I’m simply giving a flavor of the
explanations on offer that make no appeal to conserving or sustaining causes.

But this reply is mistaken. Suppose I’m a theist, and suppose I argue as
follows:

2\. In a similar fashion, you say that our observation of objects ceasing to
exist always and only due to a positive cause is superiorly explained by EIT
than by CTST. Now the problem with this is that, strictly speaking, we have
never observed (nor could we observe) the occurrence of any *positive* causal
destruction. The reason is that the very notion is incoherent. Positive causal
destruction implies that the non-existence of a concrete object O is the
effect of — brought about by — some cause. However, ‘non-existence’ cannot be
an effect. Effects must exist in order to stand in the causal relations they
do. It follows that objects cannot cease to exist or corrupt through being
caused to do so. But then, what does EIT predict over CTST?

20\. If act-potency pluralists cannot state that everything is thus and so,
then they cannot state their view.

[3] We can set aside the vast literature on masks and finkish
tendencies/dispositions (cf. Martin 1994), since I’m not concerned here with
an _analysis_ of tendencies/dispositions. For present purposes, we can either
(i) simply build into the account that for all normal cases, persistence and
destruction don’t succumb to the presence of finks, masks, and the like (which
is a plausible assumption, since the examples of finks and masks are often
outlandish or non-ordinary); or (ii) restrict the domain of quantification of
the inertial thesis (and, consequently, the inertial tendency/disposition
espoused in tendency-disposition accounts) to cases where finks, masks, and
the like are absent; or (iii) simply include within C the specification that
no masks/finks/etc. are operative; or etc.

The account, as Schmid (Forthcoming) develop it, takes its cue from one of
Edward Feser’s foremost ways of reconciling mechanical inertia with the
Aristotelian-Thomist causal principle (CP), according to which whatever
changes is changed (actualized) by something else in a state of actuality.
_Prima facie_ , CP is incompatible with mechanical inertia, according to which
an object can uniformly move from point A to point B without any distinct
actualizing cause of said change. One of Feser’s principal ways of reconciling
the two treats uniform spatial motion as _stasis_ or _unchangingness_ rather
than as the transition from potency to act. Feser writes:

**First** , an asterisk (*) indicates that the section is highly technical. If
the reader does not understand the section, that is alright—he or she can move
to the subsequent non-asterisked section without loss.

_Complementarity Principle*_ : For any object x, if x is non-trivially
disposed to display a manifestation of the kind M in (and only in) the
conditions of the kind C, then x is also disposed not to display a
manifestation of the kind M in (and only in) the conditions other than those
of the kind C. (2018, p. 62)

Second, Kerr’s claims here are simply _false_. It is clear that the
mathematical constraints that explain the frustration of Stephen’s desire do
not _cause_ Stephen’s desire to be frustrated. Since the mathematical
constraints alone explain why the desire is frustrated (given, of course,
Stephen exists, that his desire exists, etc.), this seems like a case of an
uncaused-but-explained property possession. More fundamentally, it is simply
_false_ that <if S’s existence at a non-first moment of S’s life has no
(concurrent sustaining) cause, then S’s existence at a non-first moment of S’s
life has no explanation>. We have already seen in Section 5 that there are
whole swathes of inertialist-friendly explanations of persistence on which
this conditional has a true antecedent but false consequent.

Third, the inertialist can simply reject (iii). From the facts that <(a) x
retains the same nature as x persists and (b) x’s nature doesn’t entail or
require x’s existence> and <(b) implies that there’s an outside cause of x>,
it doesn’t follow that x’s persistence continually requires an external
sustaining cause. For it could be the case, in principle, that x’s nature
doesn’t require or entail x’s existence simpliciter but does require or entail
x’s persistence once in existence. In that case, while there may need to be an
outside cause of x’s coming into existence (since nothing about x requires
that x ever exist), whether x needs an outside cause for its persistence
remains an open question. For it is false, in such a scenario, that nothing
about x requires that x persist once in existence; and the fact that <nothing
about x requires that F(x)> was precisely what motivated thinking that there
must be a cause of x’s being F. The argument therefore fails.

[Fn] Two notes. First, this is not to say it undermines all or even most
arguments for classical theism. Second, I don’t claim that a tendency to
persist is incompatible with classical theism; I have only claimed that it
plausibly undermines Persistence Arguments. For if we grant such a tendency,
then there seems to be a workable tendency-disposition account of persistence
that illuminates why things persist without appeal to external sustenance. (To
be sure, classical theists may hold that appeal to external sustenance is
needed for reasons other than Persistence Arguments. My point here, though, is
restricted to Persistence Arguments.)

  5. Pingback: [The Neo-Classical Challenge Vindicated: A Response to Feser | Majesty of Reason](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2022/07/21/the-neo-classical-challenge-vindicated-a-response-to-feser/)

The point is just that what has been said here about ordinary physical parts
like chair legs and screws would be true also of metaphysical parts like form
and matter, if they exist. … For on the Aristotelian analysis, the form of
something like copper or a tree is, all by itself and apart from matter, a
mere abstraction rather than a concrete object. … But matter all by itself and
apart from any form is, for the Aristotelian, nothing but the _potential_ to
be something. It is only _actually_ some thing if it has the form of some
particular kind of thing. So, though form and matter are different, there is a
sense in which form depends on matter and matter depends on form. We would
thus have an explanatory vicious circle if there were not something outside
them which accounted for their combination. (2017, p. 73)

Having defined our EIT, we can now turn to the final taxonomic question.[2]

Now, a problem for positive destruction in Newtonian/Galilean space-times is
that the end of the life of a material object may be vague. In some sense,
this problem is exacerbated for the positive destruction of objects in
relativistic space-times. To see why, first suppose that all of the atoms
comprising O cease to exist at the same time according to reference frame F.
In that case, there will exist another reference frame F’ in which the atoms
comprising O do not go out of existence at the same time. Second, notice that,
since the atoms comprising O will, in general, be in motion relative to each
other, even if all of O’s atoms go out of existence at one time in the rest
frame of one of the atoms, O’s atoms will not generally go out of existence at
the same time in the rest frames of other atoms comprising O. And, third,
there is some difficulty associated with defining the rest frame of a
composite object in relativistic space-times.

The intersection between EIT and temporal ontology raises one final taxonomic
question that any inertial thesis must answer: what is the temporal ontology
within which the inertial thesis is articulated and understood? Three issues
are included under temporal ontology: (i) the ontological status of moments of
time (presentism, eternalism, growing block, etc.), (ii) the objective
un/reality of temporal becoming (A-, B-, C-theories, or something else
altogether), and (iii) the manner in which objects persist (endurantism,
perdurantism, etc.). We’ve already covered (iii), so let’s examine (i) and
(ii).

[30] This is not to deny objective temporal passage, just as treating uniform
local motion as a state of unchangingness or stasis does not deny that things
genuinely go from one spatial position to another spatial location.

Here, we seem to have a perfectly respectable, perfectly legitimate
explanation of S’s existence at m. And this does, indeed, tell us how S exists
at m. That was a straightforward deduction of the explanatory facts cited
(namely, (i) S existed immediately before m, and so S’s ceasing at m would
constitute a change; (ii) nothing causally induced S’s cessation at m (i.e.,
nothing destroyed S from the immediately prior moment(s) through m); and (iii)
a change occurs only if some factor causally induces said change). And so we
do, indeed, have a sufficient explanation for S’s existence at m, one that
doesn’t adduce some extrinsic sustaining efficient cause. For me at least, the
explanation certainly seems to remove mystery as to why/how S exists at m. And
unlike what allegedly afflicts the explanatory facts adduced in the quoted
passage above from Feser (2017, p. 26), the present explanation **_does_** ,
indeed, tell us how S exists at m. (I discuss and defend other metaphysical
accounts of EIT in Section 5.)

_Act-potency pluralism_ : Everything either exists-in-act (hereafter, _a-
exists_ ) or exists-in-potency (hereafter, _p-exists_ ), and a-existing is not
the same thing as p-existing.[25]

Hsiao and Sanders (Forthcoming) provide four (or so) lines of argument against
EIT. I will address each in turn.

Third, it seems plausible that we can infer EIT employing the notion of
‘Cambridge change’, which (as I use it) refers to a change in the predicates
satisfied by S without any corresponding gain or loss of S’s properties
(whether intrinsic or extrinsic properties). In particular, we can focus on
the predicates ‘is such that O exists’ and ‘is such that O doesn’t exist’. We
can then consider changes to the extensions of such predicates. O ceases to
exist just in case the potential for the first predicate’s extension to be
empty becomes actual (else: the potential for the second predicate’s extension
to be everything becomes actual). Since—per CP—every potential that is
actualized requires something already actual to cause this actualization, and
since the only plausible way to cause the relevant change to the predicate(s)
is to cause O to cease to exist (i.e., to positively destroy O), we can infer
the truth of EIT just as before.

From what I can make out, three distinct metaphysical arguments against EIT
are proffered in Hsiao and Sanders (Forthcoming), to which I turn now. Their
first metaphysical argument runs as follows:

[6] Pearce (2017), for instance, argues that God is the non-causal _ground_ of
the realm of non-God concrete objects.

around noon yesterday. At t, the chair existed, and the chair was red.
Moreover, at t, the chair had the potential to exist, and to be red, at t + ε,
where ε is some relatively short time interval (say, a millionth of second).
Do we need to postulate the existence of some distinct thing that exists
through (t, t + ε) that actualizes at t+ε the potential that the chair had at
t to both exist and be red at t+ε? I do not think so. Given that, at t, the
chair has the potential to exist and to be red at t + ε, all that is required
for the realization of this potential is that nothing intervenes to bring it
about, either that the chair does not exist, or that the chair is not red, at
t + ε. Potentials to remain unchanged do not require distinct actualizers; all
they require is the absence of any preventers of the actualization of those
potentials. In particular, things that have the potential to go on existing go
on existing unless there are preventers—internal or external—that cause those
things to cease to exist. (Forthcoming, p. 4)

Overall, then, McNabb and DeVito have not succeeded in providing a
counterexample to Oppy’s point. The final criticism McNabb and DeVito level
towards Oppy’s point is:

I make two final points in response. First, Feser’s argument rests on a non-
sequitur. From the fact that <nothing about the nature of a contingent object
entails that it exists>, it simply doesn’t follow that <nothing about the
nature of a contingent object entails that, _once in existence_ , it will
persist in the absence of both destruction and external sustenance>. Indeed,
instances of this inference schema are clearly false. Consider that—by Feser’s
own lights—nothing about the nature of a contingent object entails that it
exists. But it is nevertheless _false_ —again, by Feser’s own lights—that
nothing about the nature of a contingent object entails that, _once in
existence_ , it will lapse into non-being unless sustained by God. Thus,
merely from the fact that <nothing about the nature of a contingent object
entails that it exists>, it does not follow that <nothing about the nature of
a contingent object entails that, _once in existence_ , the object is (or will
be) F>.

The central motivation seems to be a kind of _explicability_ requirement—that
is, a requirement that the combination of parts (at any given moment of a
composite object’s existence) be _explained_. Feser proceeds through candidate
explanations (the whole itself, say, or one or more of its parts) and finds
them all wanting. Rejecting appeal to inexplicability or brute facts, the only
remaining explanation (according to Feser) would be some external cause or
principle that accounts for the unity of the parts.

First, Hsiao and Sanders provide no justification as to why the mere denial
that existence is built into the nature of some contingent, inertially
persistent x would entail that existence must _become_ part of its nature.
Thus, their argument rests on a claim for which no justification is proffered.

However, we may worry about the cogency of strategies that explain inertial
persistence in Humean terms. We can think about explanations of inertial
persistence in two distinct contexts. First, there is the task of providing an
account of inertial persistence regardless of whatever alternatives there
might be to existential inertia. Second, we can think about providing an
account of inertial persistence that can compete against alternatives to
existential inertia. Classical theists provide an alternative to existential
inertia, i.e., that a timeless God sustains temporal objects in existence, and
that they would object that Humean Supervenience fails to provide an ultimate
explanation of the persistence of objects. Humean Supervenience fails to
provide an ultimate explanation of persistence, according to classical
theists, because, they argue, a hierarchical series that ends in some
metaphysically brute object (or objects) cannot provide an explanation for why
the entire hierarchy exists.

_Reply_. This is a valuable objection. I have at least three replies. First,
this requires that there _actually are_ such things as events—a controversial
assumption which significantly weakens the Aristotelian proof. Yes, there are
objects, and such objects have, gain, and lose various properties. But are
there such things as _events_ corresponding to such havings, gains, and
losses, _over and above_ the objects and properties? It’s not obvious. (Also,
even if we countenance _some_ events within our ontology, do we seriously want
to countenance _withdrawals_ therein, too? Might as well believe in shadows,
cold fronts, laps, and other occult entities belched from the land of voodoo
metaphysics.) Second, the assumption seems to be rather _un-Aristotelian_. At
least according to standard Aristotelian stories, it is _substances_ , not
events, that are the causal relata. This is significant given the underlying
Aristotelian metaphysical framework within which the Aristotelian proof and CP
is cast (and within which various of Feser’s replies to objections are
articulated).

The idea here is that states or conditions of unchangingness don’t require
distinct actualizers to ‘keep’ or ‘maintain’ them in such states or
conditions; only _deviations_ from such states or conditions require a
distinct actualizing cause. Stated differently, actuality behaves _inertially_
insofar as states simply continue in their state of actuality unless changed
to some different state of actuality (becoming green as opposed to red, say,
or being destroyed). McNabb and DeVito, however, are not impressed by Oppy’s
point. They respond:

Of course, there’s the further question of what explains N’s necessity; but
notice that we are now no longer concerned with explaining persistence _per
se_ but instead some feature of N. And even if we cannot answer this further
question, it doesn’t mitigate the explanatory efficacy of N’s _necessity_ with
respect to N’s _persistence_. The explanation is straightforward and
illuminating, _even if_ we don’t have further illumination concerning N’s
necessary status. And, moreover, there are a number of (seemingly) viable
proposals for explaining N’s necessity. A theistic solution might explain N’s
necessity in terms of perfection (Byerly 2019); a non-theistic solution might
explain it in terms of (i) an Aristotelian account of modality and (ii) the
non-existence of causal powers capable of destroying N or bringing it about
that N never existed (Lo 2020); or (if self-explanation is coherent) the
necessity might explain itself; and so on.

But it is not possible for the existence of x to be both prior to and
posterior to itself.

The third metaphysical argument in Hsiao and Sanders (Forthcoming), as I
formalize it, runs:

[2] This is essentially how Kerr (2015, p. 95) puts it. He writes: “if
something, _x_ , possesses some property, _F_ , then _x_ possesses _F_ either
as a result of the principles of its own intrinsic nature, its _x_ -ness, or
as a result of some extrinsic principle(s), _y_.” Kerr goes on to explain that
the ‘as a result of’ signifies _causality_.

I do not take a stance on which of the accounts is best (or which, if any, is
true). Instead, I aim to _categorize_ , _develop_ , and occasionally _sketch
motivations for_ such accounts. One reason such categorization and development
is significant is that many objections to existential inertia simply fail to
take into account inertialist-friendly explanations of persistence.[1] It is
also significant because the sketched motivations for (some of) the accounts
can potentially serve as _arguments in favor_ of EIT.

The second modal question is: do the temporal concrete objects within the
domain of quantification _actually_ persist without continual sustenance, or
do they merely persist _without requiring_ continual sustenance? The former
entails the latter, but not vice versa. Recall that Schmid’s EIT only says
that objects persist _without requiring_ sustaining causes. Importantly,
though, this is perfectly compatible with _actually having_ sustaining causes.
Schmid’s EIT therefore does not rule out (at least in principle) a scenario in
which _all_ temporal concrete objects are continuously conserved or sustained
in being from without. In other words, the truth of Schmid’s EIT is compatible
with nothing inertially persisting. This result may be unpalatable for
inertialists who want their thesis—if true—to secure the _actual_ inertial
persistence of at least some temporal concreta. For this reason, my thesis
here affirms that some objects _actually_ inertially persist.

The trouble is that simultaneous causation is not obviously consistent with an
orthodox understanding of relativity. As we’ve discussed, orthodox
interpretations of relativity entail that objective simultaneity does not
exist. Friends of simultaneous causation would be right to point out that they
use the term ‘simultaneous’ differently from how that term is deployed by
physicists (or even as ‘simultaneous’ has been deployed in much of this post).
For physicists, to say that two numerically distinct space-time points _p 1_
and _p 2_ are simultaneous is just to say that _p 1_ and _p 2_ occur at
numerically the same absolute time, that is, that _p 1_ and _p 2_ are
instantaneous. Friends of simultaneous causation should not be interpreted as
endorsing the view that causes are instantaneous with their effects. For that
reason, simultaneous causation cannot be ruled out merely on the grounds that
relativity rules out objective instantaneity. However, friends of simultaneous
causation move too quickly if they conclude that simultaneous causation runs
into no problems at all from relativity. The trouble is that the failure of
objective instantaneity makes objective concurrence much more difficult to
understand. And without objective concurrence, standard accounts of how causes
can be simultaneous with their effects break down.

Here’s the simplest way to articulate EIT: temporal concrete objects or some
sub-set thereof persist in the absence of both (i) sustenance or conservation
from without and (ii) sufficiently destructive factors operative. An object
that inertially persists, then, is one that persists in the absence of both
external sustenance and sufficiently destructive factors.

[9] Some recent developments that may favor discrete time are based on _causal
finitism_ , the view that every event, state, or substance has a finite causal
history. (For sustained arguments for causal finitism, see Pruss (2018) and
Koons (2014)). For if time were continuous, then presumably infinitely many
distinct states _could_ causally influence (whether directly or indirectly) a
final state (e.g., the location of a particle at time _t_ would be dependent
upon or causally influenced/explained by the particle’s location at each of
infinitely many distinct previous times; or my existence at each of infinitely
many distinct earlier times causally contributes (directly or indirectly) to
my present existence; etc.). Pruss (2018, ch. 8) argues along different lines
that while causal finitism does not automatically entail discrete time, it
still provides _evidence_ for it.

Feser then goes on to apply the same reasoning to other (purported) forms of
metaphysical composition, like essence-existence composition. There are,
however, several problems with this fourth step. First, it’s quite
dialectically limited insofar as it rests on contentious commitments to
various kinds of metaphysical parts.

“3. It seems to me that your Bayesian argument proves too much. On *any* brand
of Theism (e.g. Neo-Theism, Panentheism, even Deism, ect.), we could speak of
the probability that God might annihilate the world provided He has sufficient
power to exercise or withdraw.”

21\. If one cannot _state_ a view, one should not _accept_ that view.

[P]recisely because the principle of inertia treats uniform local motion as a
‘state,’ it treats it thereby as the _absence_ of change. … In this case, the
question of how the principle of motion and the principle of inertia relate to
one another does not even arise, for there just _is_ no motion (in the
relevant, Aristotelian sense) going on in the first place when all an object
is doing is ‘moving’ inertially in the Newtonian sense. To be sure,
acceleration would in this case involve motion in the Aristotelian sense, but
as we have seen, since Newtonian physics itself requires a cause for
accelerated motion, there is not even a prima facie conflict with the
Aristotelian principle of motion. (2013, pp. 239, 250-251)

3\. **Scope** : What _kind_ of temporal concreta—objects, events, concrete
states of affairs, etc.—inertially persist?

And my points here don’t merely apply to the no-change account proffered in
the above dialogue. The same holds true of other metaphysical accounts of EIT.
Even those who accept a tendency-disposition account on which things have an
inertial tendency by nature should not be convinced by what Feser says. They
will simply retort that if you leave out a tendency to persist in your
description of their essences, then your description is simply incomplete.

So, why does it thus possess _esse_? What is the cause of that essence’s
_esse_? These are not unreasonable requests, and so the burden of proof is on
the objector to show how that in which essence and _esse_ are distinct could
have _esse_ and thus actually exist without its _esse_ being caused. ( _Ibid_
)

“But, if it is a problem, it is one for all theistic views and indeed all
Abrahamic religions. For on any of those views, it is possible for God to
annihilate the universe and hence open to the Bayesian argument you propose
here.”

[6] This response, moreover, is not at all question-begging. The onus of
justification here is on the one aiming to positively demonstrate the falsity
of EIT. Thus, the inertialist need only point out that nothing in their
opponent’s argument gives them any reason to abandon their position. And since
(as I argued in the main text) asserting <continuously-non-existent-by-default
follows from continuous-distinction-between-essence-and-existence> assumes the
falsity of the tendency-disposition account in question, it gives the
inertialist who _accepts_ such an account no reason to abandon their position.

[4] See Section 6.2 for an objection to this claim and our responses.

On behalf of premise (1), they write that the “defender of EI [Existential
Inertia] would have to claim that existence is not built into its nature but
_becomes_ a part of its nature… after it is caused to exist. This would allow
a being to explain its own continual existence without something distinct from
itself” ( _Ibid_ ). I make four points in response this.

Now, one might at this juncture raise worries for this last example. Here are
two worries one might level. First, one might question whether there even _is_
such a fundamental, ultimate ground layer of physical reality. That’s a good
question, but it misunderstands the dialectical context at hand. Feser is
aiming to give a _positive demonstration_ of NPCP. One of the approaches he
takes to justifying this is _step three_ (as we’ve outlined it), which appeals
to (purportedly) clear cases of composite objects’ being sustained in being by
a pre-existent physical context. But as we argued in the previous paragraph,
one clear way to circumvent this justification is to hold that there _is_ such
a fundamental, ground layer to physical reality that provides a context for
less fundamental physical realities but does not itself have some more
fundamental physical context. Given that this circumvents step three, it
follows that the success of step three as a justification for NPCP
_presupposes_ that there couldn’t be such a fundamental, ground layer as we’ve
described it. The onus of justification is therefore on _Feser_ to justify why
there couldn’t be such a layer. Without such justification, step three rests
on an unjustified presupposition.

There are two problems with this. First, these are mere assertions. Kerr
_asserts_ but _does not justify_ the claim that uncaused properties are
unexplained. That alone suffices as a response. (Remember, the onus of
justification in this dialectical context is on the _proponent_ of the _De
Ente_ argument against EIT. For _they_ are the ones leveling an argument
aiming to disprove EIT, and hence the onus is not on the _detractor_ of the
argument to _positively show_ why or how some uncaused property is
nevertheless explained.)

Persistence being the _absence_ of change and so adequately explained by the
absence of sufficiently destructive change-inducing factors (à la no-change
accounts).

And this is true — there’s nothing in CTST, as I’ve outlined it, that alone
entails that ‘being a sustaining efficient cause’ is necessarily unique to
God. Sure, you might add some auxiliary metaphysical theses to try and derive
this. But then you’ve predicted the data only at the cost of lowering the
probability of the hypothesis.

Finally, one might simply deny the reifying of _existence_. Is there such a
thing as something’s existence or being? It’s not obvious, and Hsiao and
Sanders need to justify this assumption if they want inertialists to accept
their argument.

Friends of simultaneous causation might attempt to argue that causes and
effects can concur for another reason. Consider that the interactions between
the water and sugar molecules can ultimately be understood in terms of the
interactions between electric charges and that the interactions between
electric charges are ultimately mediated by photons. For example, when
momentum is exchanged between two electrons, we might imagine that one
electron transmits a photon, carrying the momentum, and the other electron
absorbs that photon, thereby receiving the momentum. When an electron absorbs
a photon, we might imagine that the electron and photon coincide at a single
space-time point. In the Feynman diagram that illustrates the absorption of a
photon by an electron, the point where the electron and photon coincide is
called a _vertex_. One might suggest that since the electron and the photon
occupy numerically one space-time point at the vertex, the electron and the
photon — and so cause and effect — come to be instantaneous by co-occuring at
the same space-time point. This attractive picture is presented in popular
science documentaries, where one billiard ball — representing the electron —
somehow absorbs another billiard ball — representing the photon.
Unfortunately, as attractive as this picture is, the picture glosses over a
tremendous amount of complexity.

What about destruction? What does it take to destroy inertially persistent
things, to make them cease to exist? As with sustenance, Schmid’s and Audi’s
inertial theses are cast in terms of _causal_ destruction. But, plausibly, we
should broaden this to include uncaused but grounded destruction.

[2] Another important taxonomic question—one that we shan’t explore here—is
whether we understand the structure of time _continuously_ or _discretely_.
For our purposes here, we leave this taxonomic question open.

Kerr (2015, pp. 100-105) considers whether (i) there could be any uncaused
non-intrinsic properties of a thing, and, more specifically, (ii) whether
existence could be uncaused in one or more essence-existence composites. In
order to complete my third reply to Nemes’ argument, then, an evaluation of
Kerr’s reasoning is in order. Kerr writes:

Consider, at this juncture, salt. That is, consider a sodium chloride crystal,
composed of repeated formula units of sodium and chloride ions bonded together
in a lattice or crystal structure. Why are the sodium ions right now joined to
or unified with the chloride ions? By our lights, it seems like a perfectly
adequate explanation to say that the _sodium ions themselves_ bring about,
right now, their conjoined-ness or unity with the chloride ions, while the
chloride ions in turn bring about their conjoined-ness or unity with the
sodium ions.[22]

If essence-existence composites have existence from something _ad extra_ ,
then essence-existence composites are nothing unless they participate in a
cause of their existence.

__Some works that don’t explicitly discuss EIT but nevertheless implicitly
discuss EIT or deeply related issues__

Moreover, RPCP is actually _compatible_ with EIT. We’ve already seen why: EIT
quantifies over temporal concreta _or some subset thereof_. Thus, even if
_contingent_ things require sustenance from without, some necessary temporal
foundation may very well inertially persist. So even ignoring the first point
above, this is **not** an argument against EIT.

Second, Nemes’ argument (and, by extension, the _De Ente_ argument) requires
_pluralism about being_. For suppose—as monism would have it—that there aren’t
different ways to exist or modes of being. In that case, God enjoys the same
generic existence enjoyed by everything else. But—per DDS—God is _identical_
to everything he _has_ , and hence God is identical to his existence. But in
that case, God is identical to generic existence—the existence that you and
everything else shares (under monism). But your existence, as Nemes explicitly
says, is a _constituent part_ of you. God would therefore be a _constituent
part_ of you, which contradicts classical theism. So, the _De Ente_ argument
(conjoined with DDS, which is plausibly an _entailment_ of the _De Ente_
argument’s conclusion) requires pluralism about being. But we saw in earlier
that we should reject pluralism, and so we should reject the _De Ente_
argument.[1]

First, if Aquinas applies his principle in order to account for facts needing
explanation, then if we have principled reasons to think that there is some
fact that _doesn’t_ need an explanation, Aquinas’s principle, it seems, will
be inapplicable. But why can’t the fact that a specific essence-existence
composite object exists be one such fact not needing an explanation?

_Newtonian/Galilean Endurantist Existential Inertia Thesis (NG-EEIT)_ : For
each member O of a (proper or improper) sub-set of temporal concrete objects
and for each time t such that O exists at some time t* earlier than t, (i) at
t, O does not ontologically depend on the existence or activity of some
concrete object O*, where O* is not a (proper or improper) part of O, and (ii)
if O is not positively destroyed within the temporal interval [t*, t], then O
exists at t.

Below you’ll find some very helpful resources on EIT from both sides of the
debate.

We’ll do a Bayesian comparison between CTST and the necessary truth of EIT
(hereafter, n-EIT) when it comes to explaining the contrastive fact from
Section 6.1. Let that fact be F. Now, recall F: temporal objects, once in
existence, uniformly and reliably persist absent sufficiently destructive
causal factors as opposed to being annihilated at other points in their lives
without being subject to causal destruction. For under the n-EIT, the
probability of F is 1. In other words, P(F|n-EIT) = 1. But the probability of
F is significantly less than 1 under CTTS. In other words, P(F|CTST) << 1\.
And hence F strongly confirms n-EIT vis-à-vis CTST.

[T]o explain why something gets older, where this means no more than
‘continues in being’, is not to give a causal explanation, but to explain what
conditions have to be satisfied for a description in these terms to be
warranted: you can talk of ‘continuing in being’ because the changes necessary
to make sense of the passage of time have been taking place. We are not to
read real changes into the object on the strength of these relations… There is
not, merely by dint of having endured, any feature of the object that needs
accounting for; that need arises only with the real changes which might give
the measure of its persistence. The object itself is merely co-present with
certain of these. Not a change in it, but a mere change in a relation. (2004,
pp. 91-92)

In response, I note that the charge misunderstands the dialectical context.
Yes, what is in question is whether what happened prior to t is by itself
sufficient to explain the water’s existence at t. But—and this is crucial— **
_Feser_** is the one offering a _positive argument_ one of whose premises
requires that what happened prior to t is **_not_** sufficient to explain the
water’s existence at t. By contrast, I did **_not_** take a stance on whether
or not what happened prior to t is by itself sufficient to explain the water’s
existence at t. Rather, I simply pointed out that nothing in premise (7) or
what Feser says on its behalf gives those who **_do_** think <what happened
prior to t is sufficient to explain the water’s existence at t> sufficient
reason to abandon their view. The onus is **_not_** on _me_ to give
**_positive reasons_** for thinking what happened prior to t **_is_**
sufficient to explain the water’s existence at t. Rather, all I need to do is
point out that (i) in order for Feser’s proof to succeed, he needs to
positively show that what happened prior to t is **_not_** sufficient for the
water to exist at t, and that (ii) he has simply not showed this. It is thus
irrelevant to point out that I say nothing to justify the claim that what
happens before t is explanatorily sufficient.[16]

At least some physical objects that exist never began to exist. But if that’s
so, then nothing is required to explain their _beginning_ to exist; instead,
what’s required is an explanation as to why those objects continue to exist.
And, given an Aristotelian account of laws, we can explain why those physical
objects continue to exist.

Moreover, Maudlin maintains that the passage of time and the persistence of
objects from one Cauchy surface to another is explained by the nomic
necessities between the two Cauchy surfaces. In some sense, laws _produce_ one
Cauchy surface from another and provide constraints both on what does happen
and what can happen.

A third mistake is thinking that EIT renders persistence brute (i.e.,
unexplained or, perhaps, inexplicable). This is false. EIT merely purports to
describe the way temporal concrete objects (or some subset thereof) persist.
It entails nothing about whether there is an explanation of persistence and,
if there is, what that explanation would be (apart from being compatible with
EIT). EIT thus says nothing about whether persistence is brute. And as we will
see later, there are whole swathes of inertialist-friendly explanations of
persistence. (An ‘inertialist’ or ‘existential inertialist’ is one who accepts
or leans toward the truth of EIT. An explanation is ‘inertialist-friendly’ if
it explains persistence in a manner consistent with EIT.)

Alternatively, one might notice that I have been offering a criticism of
classical theism. I have never been particularly interested in critiquing
Thomism like Feser wants me to. Why? Because Aquinas’s disciples have created
a million different schools of Thomism, and I have never been fussed about
trying to sort through them all. This is mainly because these disciples start
with an assumption that I cannot accept, and then interpret Aquinas
accordingly. This is how disciples of Aquinas work. First, they start with the
assumption that Aquinas cannot possibly be wrong about anything, and that he
is never inconsistent with himself. Second, from this assumption, they will
engage in all sorts of wild interpretative strategies to make Aquinas
infallible. I just don’t have enough faith to be a fellow disciple.

Mullins R.T. 2020b. The problem of arbitrary creation for impassibility. _Open
Theology_ 6: 392–406.

Hazony, Yoram. “Is God “Perfect Being?”.” In _The Question of God’s
Perfection: Jewish and Christian Essays on the God of the Bible and Talmud_ ,
edited by Yoram Hazony, & Dru Johnson. Boston: Brill, 2019.

I’d like to share my forthcoming manuscript with Springer with you once the
manuscript is done. It should be done by the end of August. If you can
remember (you can write it in your calendar if you want!), just email me at
the end of August and I’ll send you a pre-print of the book 🙂

Feser, Edward. _Five Proofs of the Existence of God._ San Francisco: Ignatius
Press, 2017.

Harvey, Ramon. _Transcendent God, Rational World: A Maturidi Theology._
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2021.

As for the main point at issue, I do think that the snark is unnecessary and
detracts from the overall quality of the discussion. I think coming out of the
gate with such an aggressively combative tone can really frustrate the task of
truth-seeking (and does not allow a genuine meeting of minds). But that’s just
my two cents.

Moreland, J. P., & Craig, W. L. 2003. _Philosophical foundations for the
christian worldview_. InterVarsity Press.

Anselm. 2001. _Proslogion: With the replies of Gaunilo and Anselm_. Trans.
Thomas Williams. Indianapolis: Hackett.

This entry was posted in
[Uncategorized](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/)
by [Majesty Of
Reason](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/author/majestyofreason/).
Bookmark the [permalink](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2022/07/21/the-
neo-classical-challenge-vindicated-a-response-to-feser/ "Permalink to The Neo-
Classical Challenge Vindicated: A Response to Feser").

It will be helpful to get clear on a few terms. In particular, we need to get
clear on the difference between classical theism and neoclassical theism.
Classical theism is a model of God that affirms divine simplicity,
timelessness, immutability, and impassibility. Neoclassical theism rejects one
or more of those four claims while also maintaining exhaustive foreknowledge.
Despite what the name suggests, neoclassical theism is not that new. It is
actually quite old. This is because there is a long history of denying divine
simplicity, timelessness, and so on in the Western philosophical tradition. I
will give two examples. One from the Jewish tradition, and the second from the
Islamic tradition.

But I don’t find this persuasive. Surely something might endure through time
_not_ because it intrinsically changes but instead because it changes in
_relation_ to _other_ things that intrinsically change. Even if time is the
measure of change, this only implies that the existence of time entails that
_there is some change or other_ ; it does _not_ imply that every entity that
exists in time must _intrinsically_ change. Temporal reality could be such
that (i) objects O1, O2, . . . On exist in time, (ii) one of the
aforementioned Oi is intrinsically unchangeable, and (iii) time nevertheless
exists (and passes) in virtue of the changes in objects _other than_ Oi (and
to which, we can suppose, Oi relationally stands). And, crucially, Feser
argues in his article that immutability is, indeed, compatible with extrinsic
change. So Feser has failed to establish that immutability entails
timelessness, since immutability is compatible with extrinsic change, and an
entity can be temporal in virtue of extrinsically changing in relation to
other things that intrinsically change. (E.g., a simple particle might be
intrinsically changeless and yet nevertheless persist through time in virtue
of standing in relations to _other_ things that _do_ intrinsically change.)
Now, perhaps Feser will argue that being immutable is only compatible with
extrinsically relational changes that _don’t_ temporalize their subjects.
Perhaps, but then he owes us an _argument_ for this claim, as well as an
account of what distinguishes extrinsic changes that _don’t_ temporalize from
those that _do_.

I’ll definitely have a look at your articles. I remember reading the
Aristotelian proof ones way back when, and I found them interesting and often
quite forcefully argued. In fact, several of your critiques overlap with
several of mine developed independently, so I found that cool.

Anyway, I also seem to recall Aquinas explicitly saying that God’s act of
creation is intrinsic to God, and identical to God. In which case, that is the
exact opposite of a Cambridge property which is an extrinsic relation that is
outside of God. Aquinas says, “God does not act by an action that is outside
Him, as though it went out from Him and terminated in a creature.”[24]
According to Aquinas, “The manifold actions ascribed to God, like
intelligence, volition, _the production of things_ , and the like, are not so
many different things, since each of these actions in God is His very being,
which is one and the same thing.”[25] For some reason I thought Aquinas said
that. But who knows? Maybe Aquinas never said any of that. Maybe Feser is
right to say something that directly contradicts what Aquinas explicitly says.
Perhaps that is what it means to be a Thomist. I’m not really sure.

    * Already have a WordPress.com account? [Log in now.](https://wordpress.com/log-in?redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fmajestyofreason.wordpress.com%2F2022%2F07%2F21%2Fthe-neo-classical-challenge-vindicated-a-response-to-feser%2F&signup_flow=account)

Third, and more generally, we can explain all changes (and all actualizations
of potential) without any recourse to a purely actual _being_. Here are two
entirely coherent scenarios in which this obtains – scenarios that proponents
of the argument from change need to _positively rule out_ for their argument
to succeed:

Tomaszewski, Christopher M.P. 2019. Collapsing the modal collapse argument: On
an invalid argument against divine simplicity. _Analysis_ 79: 275–284.

Nemes, S. 2020. Divine simplicity does not entail modal collapse. In C. F. C.
da Silveira & A. Tat (Eds.), _Roses and Reasons: Philosophical Essays_. Eikon.

Waldrop, J.W. 2022. Modal Collapse and Modal Fallacies: No Easy Defense of
Divine Simplicity. _American Philosophical Quarterly_ 59: 161–179.

> Because the Father’s essence and existence are identical – because the
> Father just _is_ his existence – his essence is not something that can be
> shared with anything else. So, the Father cannot share his essence with the
> Son. But per Trinitarianism, the Father shares his essence with the Son.
> Hence, Trinitarianism is false.

As you can clearly see from this page, it would be very easy to miss all of
the citations in the main text from classical theists saying that God cannot
undergo extrinsic changes. It’s not like the citations take up most of the
page. Anyway, once again, we don’t want to let facts get in the way of a good
Thomistic narrative, so let’s carry on.

Finally, Feser cites his (2017, pp. 189–190) regarding the close connection
between divine unity and divine simplicity. Therein, Feser makes the (patently
unsupported) charge that “[i]f there were in God a distinction between genus
and specific difference, or between his essence and his existence, then there
could in principle be more than one God” (2017, p. 189). But, first, this
claim is simply flatly asserted. Second—and more importantly—the claim is
straightforwardly _false_. For there are _other ways_ to secure God’s
uniqueness wholly apart from DDS. Nearly all models of God affirm that God is
perfect. In contemporary philosophy of religion, a _perfect being_ is
understood as a being that possesses all perfections essentially and lacks all
imperfections essentially (Bernstein 2014). But here’s something that seems
like an obvious perfection: being the source of every concrete thing apart
from oneself (i.e., being that on which all other concreta depend for their
existence).[30] But this perfection entails uniqueness. For suppose that there
could be two concrete beings, x and y, each of which enjoys this perfection.
Then y would depend for its existence on x, and x would depend for its
existence on y. But this is a vicious circle of dependence, which is
impossible. Hence, there cannot be two concrete beings with this perfection.
Hence, there can only be one perfect being in principle. (A perfect being is
concrete, not abstract.) Hence, Feser’s claim is false.

Charnock, Stephen. _The Complete Works of Stephen Charnock._ Edited by James
M’Cosh. Vol. 1. Edinburgh: James Nichol, 1864.

Leftow, Brian. 2015. Divine simplicity and divine freedom. _Proceedings of the
American_ _Catholic Philosophical Association_ 89: 45–56.

There are also _many_ challenges to classical theism that Mullins has
published on that Feser doesn’t address. What of his argument from changing
divine knowledge of tensed facts (Mullins 2016)? What of his co-authored
aloneness argument against classical theism (Schmid and Mullins 2022)? What of
his problem of arbitrary creation for impassibility (Mullins 2020b)? What of
his extensive criticisms of impassibility from the nature of emotions (Mullins
2020a)? And so on. A mere _nod_ to such arguments would be minimally expected
from an article promising to address _the_ neo-classical challenge to
classical theism, _especially_ given the article’s myopic focus on just the
criticisms of Mullins.

I was wondering if you could recommend any literature on the topic of whether
accepting the DDS is tantamount to endorsing atheism/naturalism. Thanks!

Mullins, R.T. “Classical Theism.” In _T &T Clark Handbook of Analytic
Theology_, edited by James M Arcadi, & James T Turner. New York: T&T Clark,
2021.

Grant and Spencer (2015) note that “​​all God’s activities that are in Him
just are God, while activities in creatures are accidents added to them.”

Suppose N is an essentially timeless, necessarily existent source of every
object apart from itself. Suppose also that N has potencies for cross-world
variance, i.e., variance in non-essential properties across worlds. Hence, N
is not purely actual. Nevertheless, N can easily explain why there is any
change. Perhaps N spontaneously, impersonally, and indeterministically causes
our universe to begin to exist and thereby causes the first events and changes
that unfold in reality. (We can suppose, further, that N is also a continuous
sustainer and per se source of all change as time progresses.) Or perhaps N
timelessly, intentionally, and freely wills the creation of the universe
(including all the changes therein). In this case, N explains why there are
any changes (at all, ever). Moreover, the explanation here doesn’t presuppose
the prior reality of change, since something’s _causing_ change does not
require _that thing itself_ to first (intrinsically) change (lest the
classical theist admit that God changes in God’s creative act). Finally,
suppose that N’s various non-essential features across worlds are
(indeterministically) explained by more fundamental, essential, necessary
features of N. Under this view, no actualization of potential goes
unexplained, _and yet there is no purely actual being_.

[27] The formula “whatever is _in_ God _is_ God” is found either explicitly or
implicitly in each of the following in connection to classical theism (or, in
a few cases, in connection to central figures in the classical theistic
tradition): Spencer (2017, p. 123), Brower (2009, p. 105), Stump (2013, p.
33), Grant (2012, p. 254), Grant and Spencer (2015, pp. 5–6), Dolezal (2011,
p. xvii), O’Connor (1999, p. 410), Kerr (2019, p. 54), Leftow (2015, p. 48),
Leftow (2009, p. 21), Sijuwade (Forthcoming), and Schmid (2022).

Would Dr Feser appreciate being labelled an “internet classical theist” (as
the word “other” implies)? Yes, he’s pretty prominent on the internet (for a
field like his, anyway), but the description seems to be needlessly demeaning.

[32] Another option is to relativize or index S’s standing in R _to times_.
Remember, though, that we’re talking about extrinsic change understood through
the lens of a _tensed_ view of time, which will involve objects gaining or
losing relational properties _as such_ —without such relational properties
being indexed to times. (So, for instance, I’m not talking about an object
simply timelessly and tenselessly _being related to something else at t_ and
_being related to something else at t*_. This isn’t change, since these are
_always_ and _tenselessly_ true.)

Feser seems to think it would be better if I focused on the work of Brian
Davies, Eleonore Stump, Barry Miller, and others. I reply that I have engaged
quite heavily with all of these thinkers other than Barry Miller. (I find
Miller’s work to be less than clear, and to have a rather odd interpretation
of various classical thinkers.) So I am not really sure what Feser’s point is
with all of this. I can’t help but think that Feser is slowing poisoning the
well against Rogers’ work in order to dismiss my objections to classical
theism. I think this might be the case because Rogers is intellectually honest
enough to admit that the modal collapse objection relies on premises
explicitly endorsed by classical theists, and arrives at a valid and sound
conclusion. Internet classical theists don’t like that Rogers openly accepts
the modal collapse in multiple places.[9] Internet classical theists also
don’t like it when I point out that other classical theists like Hugh McCann
accept the modal collapse, but let’s save that for another day.

Schmid, Joseph C. 2022. The fruitful death of modal collapse arguments.
_International Journal_ _for Philosophy of Religion_ 91: 3–22.

Stump, Eleonore, and Norman Kretzmann. “Simplicity Made Plainer.” _Faith and
Philosophy_ 4 (1987): 198-201.

Bergmann, Michael, and Jeffrey Brower. _A Theistic Argument Against Platonism
(and in Support of Truthmakers and Divine Simplicity)._ Vol. 2, in _Oxford
Studies in Metaphysics_ , edited by Dean W. Zimmerman. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2006.

—. _God Without Parts: Divine Simplicity and the Metaphysics of God’s
Absoluteness._ Eugene: Pickwick Publications, 2011.

Sijuwade, Joshua R. Forthcoming. Divine simplicity: The aspectival account.
_European Journal_ _for Philosophy of Religion_.

Kerr, Gaven. 2019. _Aquinas and the metaphysics of creation_. New York: Oxford
University Press.

On page 3, Feser complains that I have not explained what I mean by
properties. To be fair to Feser, he may have missed the part in my
publications where I allow proponents of divine simplicity to explain this
point themselves. It is in the same paragraph where I cite Rogers claiming
that the simple God does not have any properties, so it would be easy to
miss.[13] As Jeffrey Brower and Michael Bergmann explain, the simple God does
not possess any properties, forms, immanent universals, or tropes. Their claim
is that God cannot have any exemplifiables of any sort.[14] I honestly don’t
know what Feser is going on about here. If Feser wants to disagree with all of
those classical theists, he is free to do so. But don’t come to me saying that
I have made false claims about classical theism when I have explicitly quoted
classical theists making these claims.

Whether you think the number two exists is irrelevant, since I’m concerned
here with _in principle counterexamples_. The dialectic is similar to the
following. Suppose you say that what makes it the case that an entity enjoys
moral worth is that the entity, in its normal course of development, is
capable of interpersonal communication. I respond by pointing out that this
account would entail, absurdly, that an intelligent, rational, sentient alien
species with no communicative practices or abilities would lack moral worth.
Clearly, it’s no use responding to my counterexample that there are no such
aliens. The point is that (i) if there _were_ such aliens, they _would_ have
moral worth, and yet (ii) according to your account of moral worth, they
_wouldn’t_. And so your account fails.

This post is a response to Feser’s recent article “The Neo-Classical Challenge
to Classical Theism” ([ _Philosophy
Compass_](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/share/author/EJJSADCTWKEIWTZ95QAV?target=10.1111/phc3.12863)).
The post is broken into two parts. The first part is written by Dr. Ryan
Mullins and only reflects Mullins’s views. The second part is written by Joe
Schmid and only reflects Schmid’s views. References can be found at the end of
the post. Notes can be found at the end of each part.

Grant, W. Matthews. 2012. Divine simplicity, contingent truths, and extrinsic
models of divine knowing. _Faith and Philosophy_ 29: 254–274.

Second, it’s not at all clear how a _Trinitarian_ could run this sort of
argument. For the argument (and its various inferential steps) seems
structurally identical to the following argument, such that one cannot non-
arbitrarily privilege the original argument without also accepting this parody
argument:

Aquinas, Thomas. _Summa Contra Gentiles._ Translated by English Dominican
Fathers. London: Burns, Oates, and Washbourne, 1934.

Feser, Edward. 2017. _Five proofs of the existence of God_. San Francisco:
Ignatius Press.

Next, Feser considers the issue of Cambridge properties. In my publications I
directly cite various classical theists explicitly saying that God does not
undergo any extrinsic or relational changes, and that God does not have any
accidental relational properties. Feser takes issue with this. Apparently I am
once again making up stuff about classical theism. Granted, I give a long
exegesis of Augustine, Boethius, Peter Lombard, Thomas Aquinas, John Duns
Scotus, Jacob Arminius, and Paul Helm on this point in _The End of the
Timeless God_. For example, I consider Augustine’s _The Trinity_ Book V, where
Augustine is really worried about God changing in terms of “relationship
title” like _lord_ and _creator_. Or consider Aquinas in _SCG_ Book II.12-14,
where Aquinas is worried about God changing relationally. There Aquinas says
that the relations “are not really in Him, and yet are predicated of Him, it
remains that they are ascribed to Him _according only to our way of
understanding_.” In this section, Aquinas is clear that the relations cannot
be accidents in God because God does not have any accidents. In light of this,
it makes no sense for Feser to say that classical theists believe that God has
accidental relational properties.

> But what has been said suffices to show that neo-classical theists like
> Mullins have failed to engage, much less refute, the actual views of Thomist
> classical theists. In particular, having failed accurately to represent the
> content of the Thomist conception of divine simplicity, they have also
> failed to show that it is incoherent.

And Aquinas himself! Aquinas states that “the multitude of actions which are
attributed to God, such as understanding, willing, producing things, and the
like are not diverse realities, since each of these actions in God is His very
being, which is one and the same [reality].” ( _Summa Contra Gentiles_ II, ch.
10)

Next consider divine simplicity. The rejection of divine simplicity is
actually quite prominent in Islamic thought. In the 12th Century, Shahrastani
wrote a book called _Book of Religious and Philosophical Sects_ in which he
outlined three main groups: the Mu’tazila, the Compulsionists, and the
Attributionists. The Mu’tazila affirmed divine simplicity and denied that God
had any attributes, whereas the Attributionists denied divine simplicity and
affirmed that God has distinct attributes.[7] People like Avicenna fall into
the minority camp by affirming divine simplicity. People like al-Ghazali fall
into the majority camp by rejecting divine simplicity and affirming that God
has distinct attributes. Rejecting divine simplicity is actually very popular
within Islamic philosophical theology.[8]

Schmid, Joseph C., and R.T. Mullins. 2022. The aloneness argument against
classical theism. _Religious Studies_ , 58: 401–419.

Let me make something clear before I proceed. I do not claim these things, I
report them. I directly quote a bunch of classical theists saying all of this
in my publications. I’m not pulling these notions out of thin air. Ok, now let
us continue. Feser says (p. 3),

[33] Perhaps Feser can attribute this mischaracterization to one of his sock
puppets? That might also help explain Feser’s blatant, demonstrable, and
repeated misrepresentation of my published work! (See
[this](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/07/04/feser-on-schmid-on-
the-aristotelian-proof/) (Sect. 3) and
[this](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/07/11/feser-on-schmid-on-
existential-inertia-a-comprehensive-response/). See also Sect. 1 of the former
for Feser’s laughable suggestion that I engaged in sock puppetry.)

Feel free to peruse these articles at your leisure. If you’d like to find out
more about my philosophical background, please feel free to email me. Cheers,
and keep up the great work.

Next up is Feser’s claim that “From his [God’s] immutability it follows that
he is timeless, given that time presupposes change” (Forthcoming, p. 3).

Here is an example of this. On page 6, Feser says that the Thomist would
respond to my modal collapse argument by saying that _creator_ is one of God’s
Cambridge properties. Yet for some reason I seem to recall my modal collapse
argument resting on the claim that God’s act of creation is identical to God’s
essence/existence. But maybe I am completely misrepresenting myself! Maybe I
don’t understand Mullins!

To be fair to Feser, Stump does say that God can have extrinsic accidental
properties. Of course, Feser might have missed the part where Stump says that
she is intentionally weakening the doctrine of divine simplicity when she
makes this claim.[16] It would be easy to miss since I only pointed this out
in two different publications that Feser cites in his article.[17] Perhaps
Feser also missed the part where I explain that proponents of divine
simplicity like Steven Duby and James Dolezal have openly criticized Stump on
this point.[18]

Grant, W. Matthews, and Mark K. Spencer. 2015. Activity, identity, and God: A
tension in Aquinas and his interpreters. _Studia Neoaristotelica_ 12: 5–61.

Alright, one more false claim from me. I said that God is an act. Well, that
is not quite right. I quoted Rogers, Aquinas, and many others saying that all
of God’s actions are identical to each other such that there is only one act,
and this one act is identical to God.[23] But ignore the fact that I quote a
bunch of classical theists explicitly saying all of that. According to Feser,
it is mistaken to suppose that “pure act” means that God is identical to an
act (p. 4). Well, ignore the fact that I never said that pure act means that
God is identical to an act. All I did was quote a bunch of classical theists
saying that God is identical to His act. When you ignore all of the things
that classical theists explicitly say, I think you can see why Feser is right
about this point. I think Feser is right to say the following (p. 4):

> But the trouble with such objections, from the point of view of Thomistic
> classical theists, is that the claims Mullins makes about the doctrine of
> divine simplicity are false, or at best extremely misleading. The doctrine
> seems incoherent only because he is mischaracterizing it.

Renard, John, ed. _Islamic Theological Themes: A Primary Source Reader._
Oakland: University of California Press, 2014.

Another way to think of this line of reasoning is that if S is timeless, then
if F is truly possessed (or lacked) by S, then S is (or lacks) F
_simpliciter_. (Where “is” is the _tenseless_ sense thereof.) And since change
requires going from having (or being) F to lacking F, it follows that any
timeless entity—if that entity were to go from having F to lacking F (or vice
versa)—would both have F and lack F _simpliciter_ , which is absurd. Hence,
nothing that is timeless can go from having F to lacking F, for any F (whether
intrinsic or extrinsic).

[31] At least for the purposes of this post, I’ll understand _change_ within
the context of a _tensed_ theory of time. The reason for this is that Feser is
a presentist.

Levering, Matthew. _Engaging the Doctrine of Creation: Cosmos, Creatures, and
the Wise and Good Creator._ Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2017.

[30] In any world in which there _are_ such concrete things, of course. (Note,
also, that this perfection is an extrinsic property. But so are other
perfections. Knowledge, for instance, is (partly) extrinsic, as is
aseity/independence.)

This is strange. It’s strange that Feser says he’s addressing ‘ _the_ neo-
classical challenge to classical theism’ when he only interacts with
_Mullins’_ criticisms of classical theism. This myopic focus is a major
defect, as I see it, in Feser’s article—the article is completely divorced,
for instance, from contemporary scholarship on modal collapse arguments, which
far outstrips Mullins’ contributions thereto. Why didn’t Feser engage the work
on modal collapse arguments from Leftow (2015)? From Leftow (2009)? From
Moreland and Craig (2003, p. 525)? From Nemes (2020)? From Fakhri (2021)? From
Waldrop (2022)? From my _IJPR_ article (“[The fruitful death of modal collapse
arguments](https://philpapers.org/archive/SCHTFD-5.pdf)”), which already
developed two problems for the reply Feser defends in his article? From my
_Philosophia_ article (“[From Modal Collapse to Providential
Collapse](https://philpapers.org/archive/SCHFMC-2.pdf)”), which further
develops those two problems? As I hope is evident, Feser’s treatment of modal
collapse suffers from a drastic failure to engage with relevant scholarship on
the matter.

Yeah, Ryan’s response could have a bit more substance and Feser’s response to
it was good. I think Feser’s response to you will be more interesting because
you had way more to say about his arguments.

This could lead to one of two different conclusions. It might mean that the
Jewish Scriptures and the majority of Muslims are implicitly affirming atheism
because they deny divine simplicity. Alternatively, it might mean that
neoclassical theism is a very old, and well-established position within the
history of Western philosophical theology. I’ll let you decide which is the
correct conclusion.

Anselm. “Proslogion.” In _Anselm of Canterbury: The Major Works_ , edited by
Brian Davies, & G.R. Evans. New York: Oxford University Press, 2008.

(2) Feser’s predestinationism and his bizarre claim that God’s knowledge is
non-propositional (Feb. 6, 2018)  
<http://theskepticalzone.com/wp/fesers-predestinationism-and-his-bizarre-
claim-that-gods-knowledge-is-non-propositional/>

(1) 18 really dumb (and not-so-dumb) objections to arguments for the existence
of God (Feb. 4, 2018)  
<http://theskepticalzone.com/wp/18-really-dumb-and-not-so-dumb-objections-to-
arguments-for-the-existence-of-god>  
(This post defends Feser’s arguments for the existence of God against some
objections I consider unfair. The following posts are more critical of Feser.)

Spencer, Mark K. 2017. The flexibility of divine simplicity: Aquinas, Scotus,
Palamas. _International Philosophical Quarterly_ 57: 123–139.

Philosophers have come to see that an object can be both made of C and not
made of C so long as the object doesn’t satisfy both of these _at one and the
same time_. _Distinct times_ resolve the contradiction. How we unpack the
possession of intrinsic properties at different times is another question, of
course. For now, the recognition that distinct times are needed to avert the
contradiction suffices.

Dolezal, James E. 2011. _God without parts: Divine simplicity and the
metaphysics of God’s_ _absoluteness._ Eugene: Pickwick.

But there is a parallel problem of temporary, incompatible _extrinsic_
properties, for S cannot both stand and not stand in relation R. But if S
extrinsically changes, then S truly stands in R and S also truly does _not_
stand in R. To avoid contradiction, we need something that demarcates S’s
standing in R from S’s not standing in R. And the only candidate seems to be
_distinct times_ at which S stands in R and S does not stand in R
(respectively).[32]

Diamond, James A. “The Living God: On the Perfection of the Imperfect.” In
_The Question of God’s Perfection: Jewish and Christian Essays on the God of
the Bible and Talmud_ , edited by Yoram Hazony, & Dru Johnson. Boston: Brill,
2019.

Feser also covers the topic of extrinsic change and its in/compatibility with
timelessness. Of particular importance is the following footnote:

(5) Feser’s fourth proof and the mystery of existence (Mar. 23, 2018)  
<http://theskepticalzone.com/wp/fesers-fourth-proof-and-the-mystery-of-
existence/>

In my previous publications I have explained that the classical doctrine of
divine simplicity says all that is in God _is_ God. These identity claims
leave no room for any distinctions in God. Anselm is clear on this point. He
says that, “whatever is made up of parts is not absolutely one, but in a sense
many and other than itself, and it can be broken up either actually or _by the
mind_ —all of which things are foreign to” God.[19] Compare a similar
statement made by Jacob Arminius in his _25 Public Disputations_ , Disputation
IV.XI: “Simplicity is a pre-eminent mode of the Essence of God, by which he is
void of all composition, and of component parts whether they belong to the
senses or to the understanding.”[20] What this means is that not even
conceptual distinctions can apply to the simple God. As Anselm explains, “what
either actually or conceptually has parts can be divided into parts, and this
is altogether foreign to God.” ( _Incarnation of the Word_ VII). Avicenna
concurs that even conceptual distinctions are foreign to the simple God.[21]

Rogers, Katherin A. “The Traditional Doctrine of Divine Simplicity.”
_Religious Studies_ 32 (1996): 165-186.

Window dressing, or: Is the God of Thomistic classical theism as dumb as a
rock? (Sep. 7, 2021)  
<http://theskepticalzone.com/wp/window-dressing-or-is-the-god-of-thomistic-
classical-theism-as-dumb-as-a-rock/>

[23] (Rogers 2000, 27-29) (Aquinas 1934, I.76 and I.82) Cf. (Aquinas 1934,
I.16-22) (Levering 2017, 85) (Charnock 1864, 387) (Bonaventure 1963) (Dolezal
2011)

Suppose a version of neo-classical theism is true. Then, all changes in things
_other_ _than_ God are explained in terms of God’s initial free choice to
create in combination with God’s continuously performed free choice(s) to
sustain objects and cause (perhaps via concurrence with creaturely causality)
their changes. Moreover, suppose God changes in performing such choices. Such
changes are not inexplicable; they are explained in terms of more fundamental
features of God, e.g., God’s desires, reasons, beliefs, character, goodness,
and the like, or perhaps in terms of God _qua_ agent. Thus, under this view,
no change or actualization of potential goes unexplained, _and yet there is no
purely actual being_.

Anyway, that concludes my reflections on Feser’s article. Stay tuned for my
forthcoming Springer book _Existential Inertia and Classical Theistic Proofs_
(co-authored with Dr. Daniel Linford), which addresses all five of Feser’s
(2017) arguments for classical theism as well as Aquinas’s _De Ente_ argument
(Kerr 2015; Kerr forthcoming) and _every_ extant objection to existential
inertia published in the literature (and on Feser’s blog).

Ok, so all of my explicit quotes from classical theists are completely ignored
by Feser, and now he is saying that I am making false claims. That is curious
to say the least. What false claims am I making?

Kerr, Gaven. 2015. _Aquinas’s way to God: The proof in De Ente et Essentia_.
New York: Oxford University Press.

First, Feser suggests that I rely on Katherin Rogers’ work too much for my
understanding of divine simplicity and classical theism. Ignore the fact that
I over cite all of your favourite dead people in my publications. I will admit
that I have relied quite heavily on one of the greatest living classical
theists for my own understanding of classical theism. Rogers is widely
regarded as an excellent medieval scholar, and relying on her work is what
responsible scholarship demands. I do have various disagreements with her
understanding of various topics. For example, Rogers thinks that Anselm
affirms an eternalist ontology of time. I disagree. In _The End of the
Timeless God_ , I offer an extended exegesis of the classical Christian
tradition to argue that thinkers like Anselm affirmed a presentist ontology of
time.

> Several neo-classical theists have developed the charge that the notion of
> divine simplicity is incoherent. Mullins’ version of this objection (2013,
> 2021) is perhaps the most recent, and is representative of the approach. In
> a series of writings, Mullins has claimed that the doctrine of divine
> simplicity holds: that God has no properties at all (2013, p. 189; 2020, p.
> 17; 2021, pp. 88 and 93); that this entails that he does not have even
> extrinsic or relational properties, sometimes known as Cambridge properties
> (2013, p. 183; 2021, pp. 87–88 and 93); that we cannot make even conceptual
> distinctions between parts or aspects of God (2013, p. 185; 2021, p. 90);
> that God therefore cannot even be said to be Lord or Creator (2013, p. 200;
> 2020, p. 27); and that when God is said to be “pure act” without
> potentiality, what this means is that God is an _act_ or _action_ , in the
> sense of something a person does (2013, p. 201).

Any distinction that we mere mortals might come up with in our minds cannot
pick out any such distinction in God. As I have pointed out elsewhere, the
denial that conceptual distinctions apply to God is not some irrelevant
remark. It is actually crucial to medieval arguments from divine simplicity to
divine timelessness.[22] To be fair to Feser, he may have missed this
discussion in my writings. I only bring them up all the time, so it would be
easy to miss.

Second, even if (as Aquinas’s argument from change _at best_ shows[29]) the
first cause is first in each _per se_ chain of change, it doesn’t follow that
it is first in every _per accidens_ chain of change. And so nothing in the
reasoning above rules out the first cause being first in every _per se_ chain
but nevertheless being actualized (and so non-first) in some _per accidens_
chain. (This is perfectly compatible with the claim that _per accidens_ chains
presuppose more fundamental _per se_ chains upon which the former depend. E.g.
the first cause could actualize all the changes that creatures undergo which
are located in _per se_ chains, _including_ the creaturely change that
causally impacts the first cause in a _per accidens_ manner (such that the
first cause, upon receiving the relevant actuality, does not possess it wholly
derivatively). For instance, the first cause could actualize all the _per se_
changes involved in a creature saying a petitionary prayer to the first cause,
and this petitionary prayer could then causally impact the first cause in a
_per accidens_ manner—say, by causally influencing the first cause to fulfill
the petition. Here, all _per se_ chains terminate in the first cause, and
moreover all _per accidens_ chains depend on more fundamental _per se_ chains,
_and yet_ the first cause is still non-first in some _per accidens_ chain.)

Feser goes on to note (p. 4) that some Thomists say God has properties. But
other Thomists—including in one of articles Feser himself cites!—explicitly
say otherwise. I’m referring in particular to Tomaszewski (2019), who says
that “on DDS God doesn’t have any properties” (p. 281). I could go on a
citation montage of other Thomists and classical theists who say the same
thing in equally explicit terms, but I’ll spare your reading experience.

Brower, Jeffrey E. 2009. Simplicity and aseity. In _The Oxford handbook of
philosophical_ _theology_ , eds. Thomas P. Flint & Michael C. Rea, 105–128 _._
New York: Oxford University Press.

(3) Has Feser proved that God is almighty, all-knowing, good, capable of free
choice and loving? (Feb. 11, 2018)  
<http://theskepticalzone.com/wp/has-feser-proved-that-god-is-almighty-all-
knowing-good-capable-of-free-choice-and-loving/>

In my essay, “Classical Theism,” I also provide multiple citations from
classical theists making this claim. For the sake of charity, one might think
that Feser could have missed these citations in this essay. Hang on a
second…let me get a screenshot of the page for you so that you can see how
easy it is to miss all of this…here you go:

I find this odd. Notice that the doctrine only seems incoherent because I have
mischaracterized it. I’ve seen this strategy before. I have constantly put up
with Thomists claiming that the only reason one might disagree with the great
and infallible Aquinas is because they have misunderstood Aquinas. Norman
Geisler used to do this all the time, and things have not really changed much
since then.

But this is a mischaracterization of Tomaszewski (2019).[33] Tomaszewski does
_not_ say that it is question-begging against the Thomist to say that God is
identical to his act _qua_ act of creation. In fact, Tomaszewski _explicitly_
says that DDS is _committed_ to the claim that _God is identical_ _to God’s
act of creation_ : “DDS is directly committed only to (2), that is, to the
identity of God and His act of creation” (p. 279). What Tomaszewski points out
is that the classical theist is committed (and only committed) to denying that
it is _necessarily true that_ God is identical to God’s act of creation.
Tomaszewski explicitly says that DDS _is_ committed to God’s identity with
God’s act of creation; it’s just that DDS must (to avoid modal collapse) hold
that this claim is only _contingently true_. It is true in _some_ worlds but
not in others. And it’s _contingently_ true because “God’s act of creation”
only _non-rigidly_ designates God. It doesn’t pick out God in every possible
world in which God exists. It only picks him out in _some_ worlds in which he
exists. But it _does_ , indeed, pick him out in the actual world, and so—as
Tomaszewski again explicitly says is a commitment of DDS—it is actually true
that God is identical to his act of creation. What Tomaszewski (2019, p. 279)
says begs the question is only the claim that _it is necessarily true that_
God is identical to God’s act of creation. _That_ is claim (2*) in
Tomaszewski’s article, and _that_ is the claim that begs the question. But (2)
does _not_ beg the question; indeed, it’s a core commitment of DDS. ((2) is
the claim that God is identical to God’s act of creation.)

Finally, here’s an article I wrote last year, in response to Dr. Gaven Kerr
and Pat Flynn (who interviewed him). It represents my current thinking on
classical theism and DDS, as well as some speculations on the nature of God:

Leftow, Brian. 2009. Aquinas, divine simplicity and divine freedom. In
_Metaphysics and God:_ _Essays in honor of Eleonore Stump_ , ed. Kevin Timpe,
21–38. New York: Routledge.

Here is the first false claim that I make. According to Feser, I claim that
classical theism says that God does not have properties. Feser says that this
is not an accurate portrayal of classical theism (p. 3). I find this really
wild since I have repeatedly quoted Katherin Rogers explicitly saying that God
does not have properties. In case you don’t believe me, let me provide the
quote in full. Rogers writes, “The medieval view, spelled out most clearly by
Aquinas, but certainly there in Anselm, is that, strictly speaking God neither
_has properties_ nor _is_ He a property…however unified and exalted. God is
simply act.”[10] In fact, I have also cited other classical thinkers like
Augustine and Henry Church making the same claim.[11] The Reformed Thomist
James Dolezal also says that the simple God does not have any properties.[12]
Even on page 4 of Feser’s article he quotes Brian Davies saying that God lacks
properties and attributes. Also, don’t forget that Shahrastani describes
divine simplicity as the view that God does not have attributes. But we
shouldn’t let facts get in the way of a good Thomistic narrative, so let’s
move on.

(4) Flawed logic and bad mereology: why Feser’s first two proofs fail (Feb.
23, 2018)  
<http://theskepticalzone.com/wp/flawed-logic-and-bad-mereology-why-fesers-
first-two-proofs-fail>

Thanks very much for putting up these two posts. I also enjoyed your article,
“From Modal Collapse to Providential Collapse.” Just a quick heads-up (in case
you haven’t already heard): Brandon Watson has published a response to your
article over at his blog, Siris. Here’s the link:
<https://branemrys.blogspot.com/2022/01/modal-collapse-and-providential-
collapse.html> .

Right, that is a legitimate worry. I myself wouldn’t call Feser that. As you
may know, Feser wrote a blog response to Mullins’ portion [aside: I never know
if it should be “Mullins'” or “Mullins’s”], and I agree with Feser that Ryan’s
tone was too negative. (As I said at the outset of the blog post, each portion
only reflects the views of the author of the portion.) This is why I tried
keeping my tone relatively dry and scholarly. [Although, I couldn’t help but
go for the low blow in my final footnote, given that Feser has yet to
acknowledge that he misrepresented my published work. 😉 ]

Vallicella, William F. 2019. Divine simplicity. _Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy_. <https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/divine-simplicity/>. Accessed
8 August 2021.

There are at least two problems with this argument for uniqueness. For
starters, merely from the fact that God’s essence is not something that can be
shared with anything else, it doesn’t follow that there cannot be more than
one God. For all the argument shows, it could be that there are two Gods,
_each of which is identical to its own unshared essence and existence_. We
need not suppose that they _share one and the same essence_ ; they may simply
have _different divine essences_. Perhaps one of them has a divine essence
included in which is the essential attribute of _being trinitarian_ , whereas
the other has a divine essence included in which is the essential attribute of
_being unitarian_ , whereas a third has a divine essence included in which is
the essential attribute of _being binitarian_. In this case, each God is
identical to its own essence (and, we can suppose, its own existence), and yet
there is no single essence that all the Gods share in common. Now, you might
object that for each of them to be _Gods_ , they must at least minimally all
share _some_ essential attribute, such as _divinity_ or _omnipotence_. But
why? Why not instead suppose that they each simply have their own (e.g.)
_trope_ of _divinity_ or _omnipotence_? Or why not take a nominalist approach
to Gods, such that there are no such things as divine properties that any such
God possesses (and, _a fortiori_ , no properties they could share in common)?
Or perhaps each God only possesses omniscience, omnipotence, divinity, etc.
_analogously_ to the rest, such that we block the need for features that they
share in common but nevertheless preserve a _kind_ of common (albeit merely
analogous) predication among them. To be sure, the _Thomist_ may not accept
any of these possibilities; but that’s utterly irrelevant. What matters is
whether the Thomist’s argument for uniqueness has given us any reason to _rule
this out_ , to think _it’s impossible_.

Ha, well I for one prefer “Mullins'” without the extra “s”, mainly for
aesthetic reasons 🙂

This leads us to the point about composition: “Whatever is composed of parts
possesses passive potency insofar as its existence depends on the parts being
combined.”

Augustine, Saint. _The Trinity._ Translated by Edmund Hill. Hyde Park: New
City Press, 1991.

[17] (Mullins, Classical Theism 2021, 95-96) (Mullins, The End of the Timeless
God 2016, 57)

It’s the last day of August, so may I have a copy of the pre-print, please?
Thanks in advance.

On page 4, Feser makes it clear that Thomistic classical theists like himself,
Stump, and Miller do think that God has Cambridge properties. Here is the
thing. I know that Feser, Stump, and Miller love to play the magical card
called “Cambridge properties” to solve all of their problems. Following the
lead of Brian Leftow, I just don’t understand how this magical card solves
anything.[15] Further, I think that classical theists like Augustine,
Boethius, Lombard, Aquinas, and Helm understand something that Feser does not.
They understand that only temporal beings with temporal location are capable
of undergoing Cambridge changes. This is because Cambridge changes demarcate a
before and after in the life of the thing undergoing a mere relational change.
A timeless God cannot have a before and after.

But, first, it is open to the neo-classical theist to simply reject this
principle; and, as I explain in my
[_EJPR_](https://philpapers.org/rec/SCHSUT-9)[
article](https://philpapers.org/rec/SCHSUT-9) on the Neo-Platonic proof, this
rejection is eminently justified.

Ok, what else have I falsely claimed about classical theism? I said that
conceptual distinctions do not apply to the simple God. You might wonder where
I got this incredibly false claim… so, so false! Did I make it up in order to
dismiss classical theism, or did I quote a bunch of classical theists
explicitly endorsing this claim? You be the judge.

Fakhri, Omar. 2021. Another look at the modal collapse argument. _European
Journal for_ _Philosophy of Religion_ 13: 1–23.

I’ve published a series of articles critiquing Feser’s book, “Five Proofs of
the Existence of God.” You might want to have a look at them. You’ll probably
find the last two particularly interesting, as they relate to classical theism
and the doctrine of divine simplicity.

Mullins, R.T. 2016. _The end of the timeless God_. New York: Oxford University
Press.

I’ve highlighted Feser’s response to something I’ve worried about re: divine
timelessness. As it stands, I’m skeptical of Feser’s response here. Even if
‘currently’ modifies Feser’s action, _the predication as a whole_ modifies
God. And the predication goes from being _true_ of God to being _false_ of
God. So God goes from being one way to being another way; so there’s
succession in God’s life, a _before_ and _after_. So God is temporal. Or so
the argument goes.

Leftow, Brian. “Aquinas, Divine Simplicity and Divine Freedom.” In
_Metaphysics and God: Essays in Honor of Eleonore Stump_ , edited by Kevin
Timpe. London: Routledge, 2009.

Hey my dude, sorry I didn’t see this. I was expecting you to email! I very
rarely check the comments on the blog — it’s one of the lowest things in my
life priorities. But I do check my emails daily. (And I don’t get an email
when comments show up, since that floods my inbox at times.) I’d be happy to
give you a PDF if you email me! (I don’t remember whether you’ve already done
this or not.)

Kukkonen, Taneli. “Eternity.” In _The Oxford Handbook of Medieval Philosophy_
, edited by John Marenbon. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012.

While Feser’s purpose in the passage is (principally, if not entirely)
expository, it’s still worth assessing some of the claims in the passage—or,
at least, assessing them from my epistemic vantage point. One such claim is
that a first cause must be purely actual, for if it had passive potency, it
could be acted on and, consequently, would no longer be _first_ in the
relevant sense. But there are several problems with this, _even granting_ the
dubious metaphysical backdrop involving act and potency, ontological
pluralism, and the like.[28]

Thanks for this excellent and thoughtful and effective reply to Feser. I agree
with the other reader that keeping it civil and collegial is generally the
most productive strategy for addressing disagreements and misunderstandings.

One might think that the number two has a passive potency for existence that
requires being actualized by something else—perhaps a necessary intellect, or
perhaps by the number one together with the successor function. But, first,
the focus on the number two is inessential; we need simply pick an abstract
object lying at the bottom layer of some grounding hierarchy relating
abstracta. This, of course, doesn’t rule out a necessary intellect that
actualizes such an object; but the onus is not on _me_ , in the present
context, to positively show that this is _false_ ; the onus is on the one
_positively claiming_ that composition entails passive potency to show that
_any composite_ —including such an abstract object at the bottom level of the
abstract grounding hierarchy—has passive potency. “But doesn’t Feser do
precisely that in his Augustinian proof?”, you ask. “Well,” I respond, “for
starters, he only argues that abstracta exist as divine ideas. This doesn’t
entail that abstracta have passive potencies that are _actualized_ by the
necessary intellect. But _even if_ Feser were correctly interpreted as
attempting to establish this, Feser’s attempt is only that — an _attempt_. But
as I explain in my forthcoming _Springer_ book, his attempt fails. I also
explain this in [my lecture video
here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=REgU-84fQU8) and, partly, in my post
[here](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/06/04/fesers-insuperable-
arguments-against-platonism/).” But also: this move isn’t open to the
classical theist. For under this theistic conceptualist view, the number two
is intrinsic to God. Hence, if the number two has passive potency, then there
is passive potency within God. But God, _qua_ purely actual, is altogether
devoid of passive potency within him.

Here’s another way to appreciate these points and their intuitive ‘tug’.
Extrinsic change—acquiring or losing a relational property borne to something
_ad extra_ —need not be accompanied by intrinsic change. A father, for
instance, might become shorter than his son simply because _his son has
grown_. But even in such cases, the subject of the extrinsically relational
change is _temporal_ , since the subject can only gain or lose the relational
property if there are distinct moments _m_ and _m*_ of its life at which the
relational property is had and then lacked (or vice versa). For instance, it
is _precisely because_ the father is temporal that the father can at _one_
point be _taller_ than his son and then, at a _later_ point, be _shorter_ than
his son. The father couldn’t be both _shorter_ and _taller_ than his son at
one and the same time (or one and the same timeless “now”).

Stump, Eleonore. 2013. The nature of a simple God. _Proceedings_ _of the
American Catholic_ _Philosophical Association_ 87: 33–42.

As I read Mullins, however, Mullins is not “supposing that to say that God is
‘pure act’ is to identify him with an action”. Instead, as I read Mullins,
Mullins is simply pointing out that classical theists well-nigh uniformly
identify God himself with God’s action(s):

[29] In my forthcoming book with Springer entitled _Existential Inertia and
Classical Theistic Proofs_ (w/ Dr. Daniel Linford), I argue that the First Way
fails for _many_ reasons. If you want to read our chapter on it, [here it
is](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1qAzfjDNfxcFtj1dF9_jTPP0G7dTBpJpaYmeA9HbXh2I/edit?usp=sharing).

Rogers, Katherin A. “Classical Theism and the Multiverse.” _International
Journal for Philosophy of Religion_ 88 (2020): 23-39.

There is an important lesson to be learned from this. When I cite dozens of
classical theists saying X, Y, and Z, you should not think that they believe
any of that. Nor should you think that I am engaging with anything that they
are saying. You should certainly not think that I am accurately representing
their views. Instead, you can safely infer that I have misunderstood
everything. From there, Feser can consider any objection I raise against
classical theism, and say that my objections have no teeth because I have
misrepresented classical theism. Again, ignore the fact that my publications
go into detail about the ways that classical theists have historically
responded to the objections that I am running. There is no need to worry about
such trifling details like that. Feser is absolutely right that I am just
wildly misrepresenting everyone, and he is right that merely uttering the
words “Cambridge properties” makes all of the problems go away.

As these last two paragraphs illustrate, a far more apropos title for Feser’s
article would be “A Response to a Small Portion of Just Ryan Mullins’ Neo-
Classical Challenges to Classical Theism”.

Honestly, I want to reflect further on this sort of argument. _Prima facie_ it
seems plausible. To extrinsically change, it seems, is to transition or go
_from_ standing in relation R _to_ not standing in relation R to something _ad
extra_ (or vice versa).[31] But there simply seems to be no way to understand
this _from-to schema_ without temporality. If S undergoes absolutely no
succession whatsoever (as is required by timelessness), then S doesn’t go
_from_ anything _to_ anything; S possesses all S ever has in one single,
timeless “now.”

As Tomasewski (2019, p. 279) rightly points out, “DDS is directly committed
only to (2), that is, to the identity of God and His act of creation.” And
this is so because under DDS, God is identical to _each_ of his acts or
actions.

Finally, as for Aquinas’s _De Ente_ argument, I discuss this at length in my
forthcoming book with _Springer_ (focusing in particular on Kerr 2015; Kerr
forthcoming; and Feser’s (2017) Thomistic proof), but for a preview of what I
argue therein, see Sect. 7.12–7.14, as well as Sect. 7.10, of my “[So you
think you understand Existential
Inertia?](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/07/31/so-you-think-you-
understand-existential-inertia/)”.

You are probably familiar with a particular trope by now. Internet classical
theists will respond to all objections by saying, “You have misunderstood
Aquinas.” This is something that we joke about often. We have made so many
memes making fun of this incredibly tired response to any and all objections.
To be clear, there can be cases of misunderstanding the classical tradition,
and it is a good thing to point those out when they arise. Yet the constant
accusation of “You don’t understand Aquinas” from Feser and others is getting
old.

Arminius, James. _The Works of James Arminius._ Translated by James Nichols.
Vol. 2. London: Baker Book House Company, 1986.

The only other option seems to be that S stands in R in some timeless respect
while S does not stand in R in some _other_ timeless respect. But this won’t
do, since we’re talking about S’s standing in R _simpliciter_ , not merely
standing in R in one respect but _not_ standing in R in another respect. That
is, we’re talking about extrinsic change in the sense of going from standing
in R _simpliciter_ to not standing in R _simpliciter_ (or vice versa).
Otherwise, there simply _wouldn’t be change_ ; the thing would just timelessly
and statically stand in such relations but merely in different respects. That
ain’t change. Distinct times therefore seem to be the only way to resolve the
problem—at least under a tensed view of time.

Peckham, John C. _Divine Attributes: Knowing the Covenantal God of Scripture
._ Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2021.

Bonaventure. _The Works of Bonaventure: The Breviloquium II._ Translated by
Jose de Vinck. New York: St Anthony Guild Press, 1963.

Posted on [July 21,
2022](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2022/07/21/the-neo-classical-
challenge-vindicated-a-response-to-feser/ "5:48 pm") by  [Majesty Of
Reason](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/author/majestyofreason/ "View
all posts by Majesty Of Reason")

Edward Feser is at it again. You may remember Feser as the guy who says that
if you deny divine simplicity, you are implicitly an atheist.[1] Or you may
remember Feser as the guy who attacked a premise in my argument that never
existed. That’s right, he completely fabricated a premise in order to reject
my argument.[2] Well, Feser has a brand new article in _Philosophy Compass_
called, “The Neo-Classical Challenge to Classical Theism.” For those of you
who don’t know, _Philosophy Compass_ provides short essays with the aim of
helping readers get caught up on a current topic. Feser’s article aims to
offer a short summary of the current literature on classical theism, and the
challenges from contemporary neoclassical theists. Who is the main
neoclassical theist that Feser focuses on? Yours truly! It is great to see
Feser finally start to engage with my work instead of replacing Thomas Morris’
name with “Mullins.” In this short essay, I want to reply to a few points that
Feser makes in his article. In particular, I want to focus on the historical
precedence of non-classical models of God, and Feser’s continual assertion
that I have mischaracterized classical theism.

McGinnis, Jon. “Avicenna (Ibn Sina).” In _The History of Western Philosophy of
Religion Volume 2: Medieval Philosophy of Religion_ , edited by Graham Oppy, &
Nick Trakakis. Durham: Acumen Publishing, 2009.

As is often pointed out by critics of classical theism, doctrines like
simplicity and impassibility are anti-biblical in the sense that they
contradict the explicit teachings of scripture.[3] James A. Diamond says that
philosophical notions like divine simplicity “actually requires a violent
distortion of the original Jewish scriptures, imposing a notion of the Deity
that is foreign both to the written text and its voluminous oral interpretive
traditions.”[4] Yoram Hazony says that simplicity and immutability contradict
the meaning of the revealed the name YWHW in Exodus 3:14.[5] You might be
tempted to say that the Jewish biblical and rabbinic tradition are not engaged
in philosophical reasoning, so this cannot count as part of the Western
philosophical reflection on the nature of God. If you are tempted to say silly
things like that, allow me to recommend Dru Johnson’s book, _Biblical
Philosophy_.

In terms of expositing classical theistic and Thomistic views, there isn’t
much to complain about here. My sole suggestion would be to include an
analysis of _what it is to be a part_ under classical theism. Typically, for
classical theists, some x is a part of substance S just in case (i) x is some
positive ontological item intrinsic to S and (ii) x is distinct from S.[26]
More simply (and applied to God), anything intrinsic to God is identical to
God (Fakhri 2021). This understanding of parts accords well with how the
Doctrine of Divine Simplicity (DDS) is traditionally articulated. As Augustine
famously articulated it, God _is_ what God _has_ (Augustine, _The City of God_
, XI, 10). Similarly with Anselm: addressing God, Anselm writes in his
_Proslogion_ that “you are whatever you are . . . you are the very life by
which you live, the wisdom by which you are wise, the very goodness by which
you are good” (2001, ch. 12). Also later in the _Proslogion_ : “[Y]ou are what
you are, since whatever you are in any way or at any time, you are wholly and
always that” ( _ibid_ , ch. 22). Vallicella (2019) follows suit: “God is
ontologically simple . . . there is nothing intrinsic to God that is distinct
from God.” Other scholars in models of God are similarly explicit about this
conception of parthood in relation to DDS.[27] There are also straightforward
paths from other traditional classical theistic commitments to this
understanding of parthood, but we needn’t belabor that here.

First, for all the reasoning here shows, the first cause could very well be an
agent, God, with various passive potentials that could be actualized by _God
himself_ , i.e., by God’s exercise of agent-causal power. The various changes
in creation would be explained by reference to God’s creating and sustaining
activity, and God’s _own_ passive potencies could be actualized by God _qua
agent cause_. Agents actualize their own passive potentialities all the
time—for instance, assuming agent-causal views in the metaphysics of action, I
actualize my own passive potency to form intentions. (This doesn’t involve the
passive potency _itself_ pulling itself into actuality by its own bootstraps,
of course.) God, here, is quite clearly a first cause, and yet he has passive
potencies. So the absence of passive potencies doesn’t follow upon being a
first cause. (At least, not for the reasons Feser here adumbrates.)

[28] For criticisms of one of Feser’s central arguments for the act-potency
distinction, see my post
[here](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/08/23/fesers-argument-from-
change-for-the-act-potency-distinction/). For criticisms (based on Merricks
2019) of the ontological pluralist view underlying the Aristotelian
distinction between act and potency, see Sect. 7.13 of my “[So you think you
understand Existential
Inertia?](https://majestyofreason.wordpress.com/2021/07/31/so-you-think-you-
understand-existential-inertia/)”.

Second, consider the number two. The number two has various properties
distinct from itself, such as the property of being even. But anything with
various properties distinct from itself is a composite thing (by the lights of
those who accept a broadly classical theistic understanding of parthood). So
the number two is a composite thing. But the number two has no passive
potencies. The various parts of the number two do not have the potential to be
separated (since the number two, if such an entity exists, would be a
_necessarily existent_ entity—two wouldn’t just _happen_ to exist in some
worlds and not others). Moreover, all the intrinsic properties of the number
two (e.g., being a number, being even, etc.) are essential to the number two,
and none of them are causally actualized within the number two—in which case
the number two has no inherent passive potencies. The number two, then, is
both composite and devoid of passive potency. Passive potency therefore
doesn’t follow upon composition.

Here’s another way to appreciate this line of reasoning. Suppose _being made
of such-and-such atoms_ is an intrinsic property. However, one thing can be
made of a collection of atoms C and _not_ made of C (e.g., one organism is
made of a collection of atoms C but also made of a collection of atoms C*,
where C and C* share no atoms in common). How can this be? Surely nothing can
be both made of C and not made of C, for that’s a contradiction.

Dolezal, James E. _All That Is In God: Evangelical Theology and the Challenge
of Classical Christian Theism._ Grand Rapids: Reformation Heritage Books,
2017.

Interestingly, in the above passage, Feser intimates that saying “God is a
kind of action” is unintelligible (as indicated by his “(whatever that could
mean)”). But as we’ve seen, this is an _explicit commitment_ of Thomism and
classical theism more generally. Perhaps, then, Feser is a newfound neo-
classical theist, at least insofar as he _appears_ to find this commitment of
classical theism unintelligible.

Hoover, Jon. “The Muslim Theologian Ibn Taymiyyah on God, Creation, and Time.”
In _Temporality and Eternity: Nine Perspectives on God and Time_ , edited by
Marcus Schmucker, Michael T. Williams, & Florian Fischer. Berlin: De Gruyter,
2022.

Next, I want to consider Islamic philosophical theology. Quite early on,
various Islamic philosophers and theologians saw problems with divine
timelessness and simplicity. In the 9th Century a group called the Karrāmīs
rejected timelessness because they saw the obvious conflict between
timelessness and creation ex nihilo. As did 11th and 12th Century thinkers
like Faḫr ad-Dīn ar-Rāzī, Abū Barakāt al-Bagdādī, Abu al-Ma’ali al-Juwayni.[6]
(Feser says that if you notice this obvious problem you are engaged in
question begging. How dare these people notice obvious problems!)

In his article, Feser makes multiple assertions that I have made false claims
about classical theism. My reply is quite simple. I did not make false claims
about classical theism. Instead, I explicitly quote classical theists making
various claims. Feser has conveniently overlooked the many citations that I
offer in an attempt to make it look like I simply don’t understand what
classical theism is. That is what I am getting tired of. I am getting tired of
Feser and other internet classical theists just ignoring all of the direct
quotes that I offer from actual classical theists in order to dismiss my
arguments out of hand. If anyone has read my work, you will have noticed that
I often over cite classical thinkers. This over citation is designed precisely
to combat this Feser-style dismissal of my arguments. I’m not going to over
cite here, but I will provide some of the citations that Feser conveniently
skipped over.

